In preparing the text of the _Consolatio_ I have used the apparatus in
Peiper's edition (Teubner,  ), since his reports, as I know in the case
of the Tegernseensis, are generally accurate and complete; I have depended
also on my own collations or excerpts from various of the important
manuscripts, nearly all of which I have at least examined, and I have also
followed, not always but usually, the opinions of Engelbrecht in his
admirable article, _Die Consolatio Philosophiae des Boethius_ in the
_Sitzungsberichte_ of the Vienna Academy, cxliv. ( )  - . The
present text, then, has been constructed from only part of the material
with which an editor should reckon, though the reader may at least assume
that every reading in the text has, unless otherwise stated, the authority
of some manuscript of the ninth or tenth century; in certain orthographical
details, evidence from the text of the _Opuscula Sacra_ has been used
without special mention of this fact. We look to August Engelbrecht for the
first critical edition of the _Consolatio_ at, we hope, no distant
date.

The text of the _Opuscula Sacra_ is based on my own collations of all
the important manuscripts of these works. An edition with complete
_apparatus criticus_ will be ready before long for the Vienna
_Corpus Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Latinorum_. The history of the
text of the _Opuscula Sacra_, as I shall attempt to show elsewhere, is
intimately connected with that of the _Consolatio_.

INTRODUCTION

Anicius Manlius Severinus Boethius, of the famous Praenestine family of the
Anicii, was born about   A.D. in Rome. His father was an ex-consul; he
himself was consul under Theodoric the Ostrogoth in  , and his two sons,
children of a great grand-daughter of the renowned Q. Aurelius Symmachus,
were joint consuls in  . His public career was splendid and honourable,
as befitted a man of his race, attainments, and character. But he fell
under the displeasure of Theodoric, and was charged with conspiring to
deliver Rome from his rule, and with corresponding treasonably to this end
with Justin, Emperor of the East. He was thrown into prison at Pavia, where
he wrote the _Consolation of Philosophy_, and he was brutally put to death
in  . His brief and busy life was marked by great literary achievement.
His learning was vast, his industry untiring, his object unattainable--
nothing less than the transmission to his countrymen of all the works of
Plato and Aristotle, and the reconciliation of their apparently divergent
views. To form the idea was a silent judgment on the learning of his day;
to realize it was more than one man could accomplish; but Boethius
accomplished much. He translated the [Greek: Eisagogae] of Porphyry, and
the whole of Aristotle's _Organon_. He wrote a double commentary on the
[Greek: Eisagogae] and commentaries on the _Categories_ and the _De
Interpretatione_ of Aristotle, and on the _Topica_ of Cicero. He also
composed original treatises on the categorical and hypothetical syllogism,
on Division and on Topical Differences. He adapted the arithmetic of
Nicomachus, and his textbook on music, founded on various Greek
authorities, was in use at Oxford and Cambridge until modern times. His
five theological _Tractates_ are here, together with the _Consolation of
Philosophy_, to speak for themselves.

Boethius was the last of the Roman philosophers, and the first of the
scholastic theologians. The present volume serves to prove the truth of
both these assertions.

The _Consolation of Philosophy_ is indeed, as Gibbon called it, "a golden
volume, not unworthy of the leisure of Plato or of Tully." To belittle its
originality and sincerity, as is sometimes done, with a view to saving the
Christianity of the writer, is to misunderstand his mind and his method.
The _Consolatio_ is not, as has been maintained, a mere patchwork of
translations from Aristotle and the Neoplatonists. Rather it is the supreme
essay of one who throughout his life had found his highest solace in the
dry light of reason. His chief source of refreshment, in the dungeon to
which his beloved library had not accompanied him, was a memory well
stocked with the poetry and thought of former days. The development of the
argument is anything but Neoplatonic; it is all his own.

And if the _Consolation of Philosophy_ admits Boethius to the company of
Cicero or even of Plato, the theological _Tractates_ mark him as the
forerunner of St. Thomas. It was the habit of a former generation to regard
Boethius as an eclectic, the transmitter of a distorted Aristotelianism, a
pagan, or at best a luke-warm Christian, who at the end cast off the faith
which he had worn in times of peace, and wrapped himself in the philosophic
cloak which properly belonged to him. The authenticity of the _Tractates_
was freely denied. We know better now. The discovery by Alfred Holder, and
the illuminating discussion by Hermann Usener,[ ] of a fragment of
Cassiodorus are sufficient confirmation of the manuscript tradition, apart
from the work of scholars who have sought to justify that tradition from
internal evidence. In that fragment Cassiodorus definitely ascribes to his
friend Boethius "a book on the Trinity, some dogmatic chapters, and a book
against Nestorius."[ ] Boethius was without doubt a Christian, a Doctor and
perhaps a martyr. Nor is it necessary to think that, when in prison, he put
away his faith. If it is asked why the _Consolation of Philosophy_ contains
no conscious or direct reference to the doctrines which are traced in the
_Tractates_ with so sure a hand, and is, at most, not out of harmony with
Christianity, the answer is simple. In the _Consolation_ he is writing
philosophy; in the _Tractates_ he is writing theology. He observes what
Pascal calls the orders of things. Philosophy belongs to one order,
theology to another. They have different objects. The object of philosophy
is to understand and explain the nature of the world around us; the object
of theology is to understand and explain doctrines delivered by divine
revelation. The scholastics recognized the distinction,[ ] and the
corresponding difference in the function of Faith and Reason. Their final
aim was to co-ordinate the two, but this was not possible before the
thirteenth century. Meanwhile Boethius helps to prepare the way. In the
_Consolation_ he gives Reason her range, and suffers her, unaided, to
vindicate the ways of Providence. In the _Tractates_ Reason is called in to
give to the claims of Faith the support which it does not really lack.[ ]
Reason, however, has still a right to be heard. The distinction between
_fides_ and _ratio_ is proclaimed in the first two _Tractates_. In the
second especially it is drawn with a clearness worthy of St. Thomas
himself; and there is, of course, the implication that the higher authority
resides with _fides_. But the treatment is philosophical and extremely
bold. Boethius comes back to the question of the substantiality of the
divine Persons which he has discussed in Tr. I. from a fresh point of view.
Once more he decides that the Persons are predicated relatively; even
Trinity, he concludes, is not predicated substantially of deity. Does this
square with catholic doctrine? It is possible to hear a note of challenge
in his words to John the Deacon, _fidem si poterit rationemque coniunge_.
Philosophy states the problem in unequivocal terms. Theology is required to
say whether they commend themselves.

One object of the scholastics, anterior to the final co-ordination of the
two sciences, was to harmonize and codify all the answers to all the
questions that philosophy raises. The ambition of Boethius was not so
soaring, but it was sufficiently bold. He set out, first to translate, and
then to reconcile, Plato and Aristotle; to go behind all the other systems,
even the latest and the most in vogue, back to the two great masters, and
to show that they have the truth, and are in substantial accord. So St.
Thomas himself, if he cannot reconcile the teaching of Plato and Aristotle,
at least desires to correct the one by the other, to discover what truth is
common to both, and to show its correspondence with Christian doctrine. It
is reasonable to conjecture that Boethius, if he had lived, might have
attempted something of the kind. Were he alive to-day, he might feel more
in tune with the best of the pagans than with most contemporary philosophic
thought.

In yet one more respect Boethius belongs to the company of the schoolmen.
He not only put into circulation many precious philosophical notions,
served as channel through which various works of Aristotle passed into the
schools, and handed down to them a definite Aristotelian method for
approaching the problem of faith; he also supplied material for that
classification of the various sciences which is an essential accompaniment
of every philosophical movement, and of which the Middle Ages felt the
value.[ ] The uniform distribution into natural sciences, mathematics and
theology which he recommends may be traced in the work of various teachers
up to the thirteenth century, when it is finally accepted and defended by
St. Thomas in his commentary on the _De Trinitate_.

A seventeenth-century translation of the _Consolatio Philosophiae_ is here
presented with such alterations as are demanded by a better text, and the
requirements of modern scholarship. There was, indeed, not much to do, for
the rendering is most exact. This in a translation of that date is not a
little remarkable. We look for fine English and poetry in an Elizabethan;
but we do not often get from him such loyalty to the original as is here
displayed.

Of the author "I.T." nothing is known. He may have been John Thorie, a
Fleming born in London in  , and a B.A. of Christ Church,  . Thorie
"was a person well skilled in certain tongues, and a noted poet of his
times" (Wood, _Athenae Oxon._ ed. Bliss, i.  ), but his known
translations are apparently all from the Spanish.[ ]

Our translator dedicates his "Five books of Philosophical Comfort" to the
Dowager Countess of Dorset, widow of Thomas Sackville, who was part author
of _A Mirror for Magistrates_ and _Gorboduc_, and who, we learn from I.T.'s
preface, meditated a similar work. I.T. does not unduly flatter his
patroness, and he tells her plainly that she will not understand the
philosophy of the book, though the theological and practical parts may be
within her scope.

The _Opuscula Sacra_ have never before, to our knowledge, been translated.
In reading and rendering them we have been greatly helped by two mediaeval
commentaries: one by John the Scot (edited by E.K. Rand in Traube's
_Quellen und Untersuchungen_, vol. i. pt.  , Munich,  ); the other by
Gilbert de la Porrée (printed in Migne, _P.L._ lxiv.). We also desire to
record our indebtedness in many points of scholarship and philosophy to Mr.
E.J. Thomas of Emmanuel College.

Finally, thanks are due to Mr. Dolson for the suggestion in the footnote on
the preceding page, and also to Professor Lane Cooper of Cornell University
for many valuable corrections as this reprint was passing through the
Press.

H.F.S.
E.K.R.

_October,  ._


[ ] _Anecdoton Holderi_, Leipzig,  .

[ ] _Scripsit librum de sancta trinitate et capita quaedam dogmatica et
librum contra Nestorium._ On the question of the genuineness of Tr. IV. _De
fide catholica_ see note _ad loc_.

[ ] Cp. H. de Wulf, _Histoire de la Philosophie médiévale_ (Louvain and
Paris  ), p.  .

[ ] See below, _De Trin_. vi. _ad fin_.

[ ] Cp. L. Baur, _Gundissalinus: de divisione_, Münster,  .

[ ] Mr. G. Bayley Dolson suggests with greater probability that I.T. was
John Thorpe (fl.  - ), architect to Thomas Sackville, Earl of Dorset.
Cf. _American Journal of Philology_, vol. xlii. ( ), p.  .




BIBLIOGRAPHY

_Editio Princeps_:

  Collected Works (except _De fide catholica_). Joh. et Greg. de
  Gregoriis. Venice,  - .

  _De consolatione philosophiae_. Coburger. Nürnberg,  .

  _De fide catholica_. Ed. Ren. Vallinus. Leyden,  .

_Latest Critical Edition_:

  _De consolatione philosophiae_ and Theological Tractates. R.
  Peiper. Teubner,  .

_Translations_:

  _De consolatione philosophiae_.

  Alfred the Great. Ed. W.J. Sedgefield. Oxford,   and  .

  Chaucer. Ed. W.W. Skeat in Chaucer's Complete Works. Vol. ii. Oxford,
   .

  H.R. James. _The Consolation of Philosophy of Boethius_. London,
   ; reprinted  .

  Judicis de Mirandol. _La Consolation philosophique de Boëce_.
  Paris,  .

_Illustrative Works_:

  A. Engelbrecht. _Die Consolatio Phil. der B._ Sitzungsberichte der
  Kön. Akad. Vienna,  .

  Bardenhewer, _Patrologie_ (Boethius und Cassiodor, pp.   sqq.).
  Freiburg im Breslau,  .

  Hauréan. _Hist. de la philosophie scolastique._ Vol. i. Paris,
   .

  Hildebrand. _Boethius und seine Stellung zum Christentum._
  Regensburg,  .

  Hodgkin. _Italy and her Invaders._ Vols. iii. and iv. Oxford,  .

  Ch. Jourdain. ( ) _De l'origine des traditions sur le christianisme de
  Boëce_; ( ) _Des commentaires inédits sur La Consolation de la
  philosophie_. (Excursions historiques et philosophiques à travers le
  moyen àge.) Paris,  .

  Fritz Klingner. _De Boethii consolatione_, Philol. Unters. xxvii.
  Berlin,  .

  F.D. Maurice. _Moral and Metaphysical Philosophy._ Vol. i. London,
   .

  F. Nitzsch. _Das System des B._ Berlin,  .

  E.K. Rand. _Der dem B. zugeschriebene Traktat de Fide catholica_
  (Jahrbuch für kl. Phil. xxvi.).  .

  Semeria. _Il Cristianesimo di Sev. Boezio rivendicato_, Rome,  .

  M. Schanz. _Gesch. der röm. Litteratur._ Teil iv. Boethius. Berlin,
   .

  H.F. Stewart. _Boethius: an Essay._ Edinburgh,  .

  Usener. _Anecdoton Holderi._ Leipsic,  .




BOETHIUS


THE THEOLOGICAL TRACTATES
AND THE CONSOLATION OF PHILOSOPHY








ANICII MANLII SEVERINI BOETHII
V.C. ET INL. EXCONS. ORD. PATRICII

INCIPIT LIBER QVOMODO
TRINITAS VNVS DEVS
AC NON TRES DII

AD Q. AVRELIVM MEMMIVM SYMMACHVM
V.C. ET INL. EXCONS. ORD. ATQVE PATRICIVM SOCERVM

Investigatam diutissime quaestionem, quantum nostrae mentis igniculum lux
diuina dignata est, formatam rationibus litterisque mandatam offerendam
uobis communicandamque curaui tam uestri cupidus iudicii quam nostri
studiosus inuenti. Qua in re quid mihi sit animi quotiens stilo cogitata
commendo, tum ex ipsa materiae difficultate tum ex eo quod raris id est
uobis tantum conloquor, intellegi potest. Neque enim famae iactatione et
inanibus uulgi clamoribus excitamur; sed si quis est fructus exterior, hic
non potest aliam nisi materiae similem sperare sententiam. Quocumque igitur
a uobis deieci oculos, partim ignaua segnities partim callidus liuor
occurrit, ut contumeliam uideatur diuinis tractatibus inrogare qui talibus
hominum monstris non agnoscenda haec potius quam proculcanda proiecerit.
Idcirco stilum breuitate contraho et ex intimis sumpta philosophiae
disciplinis nouorum uerborum significationibus uelo, ut haec mihi tantum
uobisque, si quando ad ea conuertitis oculos, conloquantur; ceteros uero
ita submouimus, ut qui capere intellectu nequiuerint ad ea etiam legenda
uideantur indigni. Sane[ ] tantum a nobis quaeri oportet quantum humanae
rationis intuitus ad diuinitatis ualet celsa conscendere. Nam ceteris
quoque artibus idem quasi quidam finis est constitutus, quousque potest uia
rationis accedere. Neque enim medicina aegris semper affert salutem; sed
nulla erit culpa medentis, si nihil eorum quae fieri oportebat omiserit.
Idemque in ceteris. At quantum haec difficilior quaestio est, tam facilior
esse debet ad ueniam. Vobis tamen etiam illud inspiciendum est, an ex beati
Augustini scriptis semina rationum aliquos in nos uenientia fructus
extulerint. Ac de proposita quaestione hinc sumamus initium.


[ ] sed ne _codices optimi_.








  THE TRINITY IS ONE GOD NOT THREE GODS

  A TREATISE BY ANICIUS MANLIUS SEVERINUS BOETHIUS MOST HONOURABLE, OF THE
  ILLUSTRIOUS ORDER OF EX-CONSULS, PATRICIAN

  TO HIS FATHER-IN-LAW, QUINTUS AURELIUS MEMMIUS SYMMACHUS
  MOST HONOURABLE, OF THE ILLUSTRIOUS ORDER OF EX-CONSULS, PATRICIAN

  I have long pondered this problem with such mind as I have and all the
  light that God has lent me. Now, having set it forth in logical order
  and cast it into literary form, I venture to submit it to your judgment,
  for which I care as much as for the results of my own research. You will
  readily understand what I feel whenever I try to write down what I think
  if you consider the difficulty of the topic and the fact that I discuss
  it only with the few--I may say with no one but yourself. It is indeed
  no desire for fame or empty popular applause that prompts my pen; if
  there be any external reward, we may not look for more warmth in the
  verdict than the subject itself arouses. For, apart from yourself,
  wherever I turn my eyes, they fall on either the apathy of the dullard
  or the jealousy of the shrewd, and a man who casts his thoughts before
  the common herd--I will not say to consider but to trample under foot,
  would seem to bring discredit on the study of divinity. So I purposely
  use brevity and wrap up the ideas I draw from the deep questionings of
  philosophy in new and unaccustomed words which speak only to you and to
  myself, that is, if you deign to look at them. The rest of the world I
  simply disregard: they cannot understand, and therefore do not deserve
  to read. We should not of course press our inquiry further than man's
  wit and reason are allowed to climb the height of heavenly knowledge.[ ]
  In all the liberal arts we see the same limit set beyond which reason
  may not reach. Medicine, for instance, does not always bring health to
  the sick, though the doctor will not be to blame if he has left nothing
  undone which he ought to do. So with the other arts. In the present case
  the very difficulty of the quest claims a lenient judgment. You must
  however examine whether the seeds sown in my mind by St. Augustine's
  writings[ ] have borne fruit. And now let us begin our inquiry.


  [ ] Cf. the discussion of human _ratio_ and divine _intellegentia_ in
  _Cons. v._ pr.   and  .

  [ ] e.g. Aug. _De Trin._




I.

Christianae religionis reuerentiam plures usurpant, sed ea fides pollet
maxime ac solitarie quae cum propter uniuersalium praecepta regularum,
quibus eiusdem religionis intellegatur auctoritas, tum propterea, quod eius
cultus per omnes paene mundi terminos emanauit, catholica uel uniuersalis
uocatur. Cuius haec de trinitatis unitate sententia est: "Pater," inquiunt,
"deus filius deus spiritus sanctus deus." Igitur pater filius spiritus
sanctus unus non tres dii. Cuius coniunctionis ratio est indifferentia. Eos
enim differentia comitatur qui uel augent uel minuunt, ut Arriani qui
gradibus meritorum trinitatem uariantes distrahunt atque in pluralitatem
diducunt. Principium enim pluralitatis alteritas est; praeter alteritatem
enim nec pluralitas quid sit intellegi potest. Trium namque rerum uel
quotlibet tum genere tum specie tum numero diuersitas constat; quotiens
enim idem dicitur, totiens diuersum etiam praedicatur. Idem uero dicitur
tribus modis: aut genere ut idem homo quod equus, quia his idem genus ut
animal; uel specie ut idem Cato quod Cicero, quia eadem species ut homo;
uel numero ut Tullius et Cicero, quia unus est numero. Quare diuersum etiam
uel genere uel specie uel numero dicitur. Sed numero differentiam
accidentium uarietas facit. Nam tres homines neque genere neque specie sed
suis accidentibus distant; nam uel si animo cuncta ab his accidentia
separemus, tamen locus cunctis diuersus est quem unum fingere nullo modo
possumus; duo enim corpora unum locum non obtinebunt, qui est accidens.
Atque ideo sunt numero plures, quoniam accidentibus plures fiunt.




  I.

  There are many who claim as theirs the dignity of the Christian
  religion; but that form of faith is valid and only valid which, both on
  account of the universal character of the rules and doctrines affirming
  its authority, and because the worship in which they are expressed has
  spread throughout the world, is called catholic or universal. The belief
  of this religion concerning the Unity of the Trinity is as follows: the
  Father is God, the Son is God, the Holy Spirit is God. Therefore Father,
  Son, and Holy Spirit are one God, not three Gods. The principle of this
  union is absence of difference[ ]: difference cannot be avoided by
  those who add to or take from the Unity, as for instance the Arians,
  who, by graduating the Trinity according to merit, break it up and
  convert it to Plurality. For the essence of plurality is otherness;
  apart from otherness plurality is unintelligible. In fact, the
  difference between three or more things lies in genus or species or
  number. Difference is the necessary correlative of sameness. Sameness is
  predicated in three ways: By genus; e.g. a man and a horse, because of
  their common genus, animal. By species; e.g. Cato and Cicero, because of
  their common species, man. By number; e.g. Tully and Cicero, because
  they are numerically one. Similarly difference is expressed by genus,
  species, and number. Now numerical difference is caused by variety of
  accidents; three men differ neither by genus nor species but by their
  accidents, for if we mentally remove from them all other accidents,[ ]
  still each one occupies a different place which cannot possibly be
  regarded as the same for each, since two bodies cannot occupy the same
  place, and place is an accident. Wherefore it is because men are plural
  by their accidents that they are plural in number.


  [ ] The terms _differentia, numerus, species,_ are used expertly, as
  would be expected of the author of the _In Isag. Porph. Commenta._ See
  S. Brandt's edition of that work (in the Vienna _Corpus_,  ), s.v.
  _differentia,_ etc.

  [ ] This method of mental abstraction is employed more elaborately in
  _Tr._ iii. (_vide infra_, p.  ) and in _Cons._ v. pr.  , where the
  notion of divine foreknowledge is abstracted in imagination.




II.

Age igitur ingrediamur et unumquodque ut intellegi atque capi potest
dispiciamus; nam, sicut optime dictum uidetur, eruditi est hominis unum
quodque ut ipsum est ita de eo fidem capere temptare.

Nam cum tres sint speculatiuae partes, _naturalis_, in motu
inabstracta [Greek: anupexairetos] (considerat enim corporum formas cum
materia, quae a corporibus actu separari non possunt, quae corpora in motu
sunt ut cum terra deorsum ignis sursum fertur, habetque motum forma
materiae coniuncta), _mathematica_, sine motu inabstracta (haec enim
formas corporum speculatur sine materia ac per hoc sine motu, quae formae
cum in materia sint, ab his separari non possunt), _theologica_, sine
motu abstracta atque separabilis (nam dei substantia et materia et motu
caret), in naturalibus igitur rationabiliter, in mathematicis
disciplinaliter, in diuinis intellectualiter uersari oportebit neque diduci
ad imaginationes, sed potius ipsam inspicere formam quae uere forma neque
imago est et quae esse ipsum est et ex qua esse est. Omne namque esse ex
forma est. Statua enim non secundum aes quod est materia, sed secundum
formam qua in eo insignita est effigies animalis dicitur, ipsumque aes non
secundum terram quod est eius materia, sed dicitur secundum aeris figuram.
Terra quoque ipsa non secundum [Greek: apoion hulaen] dicitur, sed secundum
siccitatem grauitatemque quae sunt formae. Nihil igitur secundum materiam
esse dicitur sed secundum propriam formam. Sed diuina substantia sine
materia forma est atque ideo unum et est id quod est. Reliqua enim non sunt
id quod sunt. Vnum quodque enim habet esse suum ex his ex quibus est, id
est ex partibus suis, et est hoc atque hoc, id est partes suae coniunctae,
sed non hoc uel hoc singulariter, ut cum homo terrenus constet ex anima
corporeque, corpus et anima est, non uel corpus uel anima in partem; igitur
non est id quod est. Quod uero non est ex hoc atque hoc, sed tantum est
hoc, illud uere est id quod est; et est pulcherrimum fortissimumque quia
nullo nititur. Quocirca hoc uere unum in quo nullus numerus, nullum in eo
aliud praeterquam id quod est. Neque enim subiectum fieri potest; forma
enim est, formae uero subiectae esse non possunt. Nam quod ceterae formae
subiectae accidentibus sunt ut humanitas, non ita accidentia suscipit eo
quod ipsa est, sed eo quod materia ei subiecta est; dum enim materia
subiecta humanitati suscipit quodlibet accidens, ipsa hoc suscipere uidetur
humanitas. Forma uero quae est sine materia non poterit esse subiectum nec
uero inesse materiae, neque enim esset forma sed imago. Ex his enim formis
quae praeter materiam sunt, istae formae uenerunt quae sunt in materia et
corpus efficiunt. Nam ceteras quae in corporibus sunt abutimur formas
uocantes, dum imagines sint. Adsimulantur enim formis his quae non sunt in
materia constitutae. Nulla igitur in eo diuersitas, nulla ex diuersitate
pluralitas, nulla ex accidentibus multitudo atque idcirco nec numerus.




  II.

  We will now begin a careful consideration of each several point, as far
  as they can be grasped and understood; for it has been wisely said,[ ]
  in my opinion, that it is a scholar's duty to formulate his belief about
  anything according to its real nature.

  Speculative Science may be divided into three kinds[ ]: Physics,
  Mathematics, and Theology. Physics deals with motion and is not abstract
  or separable (i.e. [Greek: anupexairetos]); for it is concerned with the
  forms of bodies together with their constituent matter, which forms
  cannot be separated in reality from their bodies.[ ] As the bodies are
  in motion--the earth, for instance, tending downwards, and fire tending
  upwards, form takes on the movement of the particular thing to which it
  is annexed.

  Mathematics does not deal with motion and is not abstract, for it
  investigates forms of bodies apart from matter, and therefore apart from
  movement, which forms, however, being connected with matter cannot be
  really separated from bodies.

  Theology does not deal with motion and is abstract and separable, for
  the Divine Substance is without either matter or motion. In Physics,
  then, we are bound to use scientific, in Mathematics, systematical, in
  Theology, intellectual concepts; and in Theology we will not let
  ourselves be diverted to play with imaginations, but will simply
  apprehend that Form which is pure form and no image, which is very Being
  and the source of Being. For everything owes its being to Form. Thus a
  statue is not a statue on account of the brass which is its matter, but
  on account of the form whereby the likeness of a living thing is
  impressed upon it: the brass itself is not brass because of the earth
  which is its matter, but because of its form. Likewise earth is not
  earth by reason of unqualified matter,[ ] but by reason of dryness and
  weight, which are forms. So nothing is said to be because it has matter,
  but because it has a distinctive form. But the Divine Substance is Form
  without matter, and is therefore One, and is its own essence. But other
  things are not simply their own essences, for each thing has its being
  from the things of which it is composed, that is, from its parts. It is
  This _and_ That, i.e. it is the totality of its parts in
  conjunction; it is not This _or_ That taken apart. Earthly man, for
  instance, since he consists of soul and body, is soul _and_ body,
  not soul _or_ body, separately; therefore he is not his own
  essence. That on the other hand which does not consist of This and That,
  but is only This, is really its own essence, and is altogether beautiful
  and stable because it is not grounded in anything. Wherefore that is
  truly One in which is no number, in which nothing is present except its
  own essence. Nor can it become the substrate of anything, for it is pure
  Form, and pure Forms cannot be substrates.[ ] For if humanity, like
  other forms, is a substrate for accidents, it does not receive accidents
  through the fact that it exists, but through the fact that matter is
  subjected to it. Humanity appears indeed to appropriate the accident
  which in reality belongs to the matter underlying the conception
  Humanity. But Form which is without matter cannot be a substrate, and
  cannot have its essence in matter, else it would not be form but a
  reflexion. For from those forms which are outside matter come the forms
  which are in matter and produce bodies. We misname the entities that
  reside in bodies when we call them forms; they are mere images; they
  only resemble those forms which are not incorporate in matter. In Him,
  then, is no difference, no plurality arising out of difference, no
  multiplicity arising out of accidents, and accordingly no number.


  [ ] By Cicero (_Tusc_. v.  .  ).

  [ ] Cf. the similar division of philosophy in _Isag. Porph_. ed. Brandt,
  pp.   ff.

  [ ] _Sb_. though they may be separated in thought.

  [ ] [Greek: Apoios hulae] = [Greek: to amorphon, to aeides] of
  Aristotle. Cf. [Greek: oute gar hulae to eidos (hae men apoios, to de
  poiotaes tis) oute ex hulaes] (Alexander Aphrod. _De Anima_,  .  );
  [Greek: ei de touto, apoios de hae hulae, apoion an eiae soma] (id. _De
  anima libri mantissa_,  .  ).

  [ ] This is Realism. Cf. "Sed si rerum ueritatem atque integritatem
  perpendas, non est dubium quin uerae sint. Nam cum res omnes quae uerae
  sunt sine his quinque (i.e. genus species differentia propria
  accidentia) esse non possint, has ipsas quinque res uere intellectas
  esse non dubites." _Isag., Porph. ed, pr._ i. (M. _P.L._ lxiv. col.  ,
  Brandt, pp.   ff.). The two passages show that Boethius is definitely
  committed to the Realistic position, although in his _Comment. in
  Porphyr. a se translatum_ he holds the scales between Plato and
  Aristotle, "quorum diiudicare sententias aptum esse non duxi" (cp.
  Hauréau, _Hist. de la philosophie scolastique_, i.  ). As a fact in
  the _Comment. in Porph._ he merely postpones the question, which in the
  _De Trin._ he settles. Boethius was ridiculed in the Middle Ages for his
  caution.




III.

Deus uero a deo nullo differt, ne uel accidentibus uel substantialibus
differentiis in subiecto positis distent. Vbi uero nulla est differentia,
nulla est omnino pluralitas, quare nec numerus; igitur unitas tantum. Nam
quod tertio repetitur deus, cum pater ac filius et spiritus sanctus
nuncupatur, tres unitates non faciunt pluralitatem numeri in eo quod ipsae
sunt, si aduertamus ad res numerabiles ac non ad ipsum numerum. Illic enim
unitatum repetitio numerum facit. In eo autem numero qui in rebus
numerabilibus constat, repetitio unitatum atque pluralitas minime facit
numerabilium rerum numerosam diuersitatem. Numerus enim duplex est, unus
quidem quo numeramus, alter uero qui in rebus numerabilibus constat. Etenim
unum res est; unitas, quo unum dicimus. Duo rursus in rebus sunt ut homines
uel lapides; dualitas nihil, sed tantum dualitas qua duo homines uel duo
lapides fiunt. Et in ceteris eodem modo. Ergo in numero quo numeramus
repetitio unitatum facit pluralitatem; in rerum uero numero non facit
pluralitatem unitatum repetitio, uel si de eodem dicam "gladius unus mucro
unus ensis unus." Potest enim unus tot uocabulis gladius agnosci; haec enim
unitatum iteratio potius est non numeratio, uelut si ita dicamus "ensis
mucro gladius," repetitio quaedam est eiusdem non numeratio diuersorum,
uelut si dicam "sol sol sol," non tres soles effecerim, sed de uno totiens
praedicauerim.

Non igitur si de patre ac filio et spiritu sancto tertio praedicatur deus,
idcirco trina praedicatio numerum facit. Hoc enim illis ut dictum est
imminet qui inter eos distantiam faciunt meritorum. Catholicis uero nihil
in differentia constituentibus ipsamque formam ut est esse ponentibus neque
aliud esse quam est ipsum quod est opinantibus recte repetitio de eodem
quam enumeratio diuersi uidetur esse cum dicitur "deus pater deus filius
deus spiritus sanctus atque haec trinitas unus deus," uelut "ensis atque
mucro unus gladius," uelut "sol sol sol unus sol."

Sed hoc interim ad eam dictum sit significationem demonstrationemque qua
ostenditur non omnem unitatum repetitionem numerum pluralitatemque
perficere. Non uero ita dicitur "pater ac filius et spiritus sanctus" quasi
multiuocum quiddam; nam mucro et ensis et ipse est et idem, pater uero ac
filius et spiritus sanctus idem equidem est, non uero ipse. In qua re
paulisper considerandum est. Requirentibus enim: "Ipse est pater qui
filius?" "Minime," inquiunt. Rursus: "Idem alter qui alter?" Negatur. Non
est igitur inter eos in re omni indifferentia; quare subintrat numerus quem
ex subiectorum diuersitate confici superius explanatum est. De qua re
breuite*r considerabimus, si prius illud, quem ad modum de deo unum quodque
praedicatur, praemiserimus.




  III.

  Now God differs from God in no respect, for there cannot be divine
  essences distinguished either by accidents or by substantial differences
  belonging to a substrate. But where there is no difference, there is no
  sort of plurality and accordingly no number; here, therefore, is unity
  alone. For whereas we say God thrice when we name the Father, Son, and
  Holy Spirit, these three unities do not produce a plurality of number in
  their own essences, if we think of what we count instead of what we
  count with. For in the case of abstract number a repetition of single
  items does produce plurality; but in the case of concrete number the
  repetition and plural use of single items does not by any means produce
  numerical difference in the objects counted. There are as a fact two
  kinds of number. There is the number with which we count (abstract) and
  the number inherent in the things counted (concrete). "One" is a thing--
  the thing counted. Unity is that by which oneness is denoted. Again
  "two" belongs to the class of things as men or stones; but not so
  duality; duality is merely that whereby two men or two stones are
  denoted; and so on. Therefore a repetition of unities[ ] produces
  plurality when it is a question of abstract, but not when it is a
  question of concrete things, as, for example, if I say of one and the
  same thing, "one sword, one brand, one blade."[ ]  It is easy to see
  that each of these names denotes a sword; I am not numbering unities but
  simply repeating one thing, and in saying "sword, brand, blade," I
  reiterate the one thing and do not enumerate several different things
  any more than I produce three suns instead of merely mentioning one
  thing thrice when I say "Sun, Sun, Sun."

  So then if God be predicated thrice of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, the
  threefold predication does not result in plural number. The risk of
  that, as has been said, attends only on those who distinguish Them
  according to merit. But Catholic Christians, allowing no difference of
  merit in God, assuming Him to be Pure Form and believing Him to be
  nothing else than His own essence, rightly regard the statement "the
  Father is God, the Son is God, the Holy Spirit is God, and this Trinity
  is one God," not as an enumeration of different things but as a
  reiteration of one and the same thing, like the statement, "blade and
  brand are one sword" or "sun, sun, and sun are one sun."

  Let this be enough for the present to establish my meaning and to show
  that not every repetition of units produces number and plurality. Still
  in saying "Father, Son, and Holy Spirit," we are not using synonymous
  terms. "Brand and blade" are the same and identical, but "Father, Son,
  and Holy Spirit," though the same, are not identical. This point
  deserves a moment's consideration. When they ask "Is the Father the same
  as the Son?" Catholics answer "No." "Is the One the same as the Other?"
  The answer is in the negative. There is not, therefore, complete
  indifference between Them; and so number does come in--number which we
  explained was the result of diversity of substrates. We will briefly
  debate this point when we have done examining how particular predicates
  can be applied to God.


  [ ] e.g. if I say "one, one, one," I enounce three unities.

  [ ] The same words are used to illustrate the same matter in the
  _Comment. in Arist._ [Greek: peri hermaeneias],  nd ed. (Meiser)  .  .




IV.

Decem omnino praedicamenta traduntur quae de rebus omnibus uniuersaliter
praedicantur, id est substantia, qualitas, quantitas, ad aliquid, ubi,
quando, habere, situm esse, facere, pati. Haec igitur talis sunt qualia
subiecta permiserint; nam pars eorum in reliquarum rerum praedicatione
substantia est, pa*rs in accidentium numero est. At haec cum quis i*n
diuinam uerterit praedicationem, cuncta mutantu*r quae praedicari possunt.
Ad aliquid uero omnino non potest praedicari, nam substantia in illo non
est uere substantia sed ultra substantiam; item qualitas et cetera quae
uenire queunt. Quorum ut amplior fiat intellectus exempla subdenda sunt.

Nam cum dicimus "deus," substantiam quidem significare uidemur, sed eam
quae sit ultra substantiam; cum uero "iustus," qualitatem quidem sed non
accidentem, sed eam quae sit substantia sed ultra substantiam. Neque enim
aliud est quod est, aliud est quod iustus est, sed idem est esse deo quod
iusto. Item cum dicitur "magnus uel maximus," quantitatem quidem
significare uidemur, sed eam quae sit ipsa substantia, talis qualem esse
diximus ultra substantiam; idem est enim esse deo quod magno. De forma enim
eius superius monstratum est quoniam is sit forma et unum uere nec ulla
pluralitas. Sed haec praedicamenta talia sunt, ut in quo sint ipsum esse
faciant quod dicitur, diuise quidem in ceteris, in deo uero coniuncte atque
copulate hoc modo: nam cum dicimus "substantia" (ut homo uel deus), ita
dicitur quasi illud de quo praedicatur ipsum sit substantia, ut substantia
homo uel deus. Sed distat, quoniam homo non integre ipsum homo est ac per
hoc nec substantia; quod enim est, aliis debet quae non sunt homo. Deus
uero hoc ipsum deus est; nihil enim aliud est nisi quod est, ac per hoc
ipsum deus est. Rursus "iustus," quod est qualitas, ita dicitur quasi ipse
hoc sit de quo praedicatur, id est si dicamus "homo iustus uel deus
iustus," ipsum hominem uel deum iustos esse proponimus; sed differt, quod
homo alter alter iustus, deus uero idem ipsum est quod est iustum. "Magnus"
etiam homo uel deus dicitur atque ita quasi ipse sit homo magnus uel deus
magnus; sed homo tantum magnus, deus uero ipsum magnus exsistit. Reliqua
uero neque de deo neque de ceteris praedicantur. Nam ubi uel de homine uel
de deo praedicari potest, de homine ut in foro, de deo ut ubique, sed ita
ut non quasi ipsa sit res id quod praedicatur de qua dicitur. Non enim ita
homo dicitur esse in foro quem ad modum esse albus uel longus nec quasi
circumfusus et determinatus proprietate aliqua qua designari secundum se
possit, sed tantum quo sit illud aliis informatum rebus per hanc
praedicationem ostenditur.

De deo uero non ita, nam quod ubique est ita dici uidetur non quod in omni
sit loco (omnino enim in loco esse non potest) sed quod omnis ei locus
adsit ad eum capiendum, cum ipse non suscipiatur in loco; atque ideo
nusquam in loco esse dicitur, quoniam ubique est sed non in loco. "Quando"
uero eodem praedicatur modo, ut de homine heri uenit, de deo semper est.
Hic quoque non quasi esse aliquid dicitur illud ipsum de quo hesternus
dicitur aduentus, sed quid ei secundum tempus accesserit praedicatur. Quod
uero de deo dicitur "semper est," unum quidem significat, quasi omni
praeterito fuerit, omni quoquo modo sit praesenti est, omni futuro erit.
Quod de caelo et de ceteris inmortalibus corporibus secundum philosophos
dici potest, at de deo non ita. Semper enim est, quoniam "semper"
praesentis est in eo temporis tantumque inter nostrarum rerum praesens,
quod est nunc, interest ac diuinarum, quod nostrum "nunc" quasi currens
tempus facit et sempiternitatem, diuinum uero "nunc" permanens neque mouens
sese atque consistens aeternitatem facit; cui nomini si adicias "semper,"
facies eius quod est nunc iugem indefessumque ac per hoc perpetuum cursum
quod est sempiternitas.

Rursus habere uel facere eodem modo; dicimus enim "uestitus currit" de
homine, de deo "cuncta possidens regit." Rursus de eo nihil quod est esse
de utrisque dictum est, sed haec omnis praedicatio exterioribus datur
omniaque haec quodam modo referuntur ad aliud. Cuius praedicationis
differentiam sic facilius internoscimus: qui homo est uel deus refertur ad
substantiam qua est aliquid, id est homo uel deus; qui iustus est refertur
ad qualitatem qua scilicet est aliquid, id est iustus, qui magnus ad
quantitatem qua est aliquid, id est magnus. Nam in ceteris praedicationibus
nihil tale est. Qui enim dicit esse aliquem in foro uel ubique, refert
quidem ad praedicamentum quod est ubi, sed non quo aliquid est uelut
iustitia iustus. Item cum dico "currit" uel "regit" uel "nunc est" uel
"semper est," refertur quidem uel ad facere uel ad tempus--si tamen interim
diuinum illud semper tempus dici potest--sed non quo aliquo aliquid est
uelut magnitudine magnum. Nam situm passionemque requiri in deo non
oportet, neque enim sunt.

Iamne patet quae sit differentia praedicationum? Quod aliae quidem quasi
rem monstrant aliae uero quasi circumstantias rei quodque illa quidem[ ]
ita praedicantur, ut esse aliquid rem ostendant, illa uero ut non esse, sed
potius extrinsecus aliquid quodam modo affigant. Illa igitur, quae aliquid
esse designant, secundum rem praedicationes uocentur. Quae cum de rebus
subiectis dicuntur, uocantur accidentia secundum rem; cum uero de deo qui
subiectus non est, secundum substantiam rei praedicatio nuncupatur.


[ ] quidem _vulg._; quae _codd. opt._




  IV.

  There are in all ten categories which can be universally predicated of
  things, namely, Substance, Quality, Quantity, Relation, Place, Time,
  Condition, Situation, Activity, Passivity. Their meaning is determined
  by the contingent subject; for some of them denote substance in making
  predication of other things, others belong to the class of accidents.
  But when these categories are applied to God they change their meaning
  entirely. Relation, for instance, cannot be predicated at all of God;
  for substance in Him is not really substantial but supersubstantial. So
  with quality and the other possible attributes, of which we must add
  examples for the sake of clearness.

  When we say God, we seem to denote a substance; but it is a substance
  that is supersubstantial. When we say of Him, "He is just," we mention a
  quality, not an accidental quality--rather a substantial and, in fact, a
  supersubstantial quality.[ ] For God is not one thing because He is,
  and another thing because He is just; with Him to be just and to be God
  are one and the same. So when we say, "He is great or the greatest," we
  seem to predicate quantity, but it is a quantity similar to this
  substance which we have declared to be supersubstantial; for with Him to
  be great and to be God are all one. Again, concerning His Form, we have
  already shown that He is Form, and truly One without Plurality. The
  categories we have mentioned are such that they give to the thing to
  which they are applied the character which they express; in created
  things they express divided being, in God, conjoined and united being--
  in the following manner. When we name a substance, as man or God, it
  seems as though that of which the predication is made were substance
  itself, as man or God is substance. But there is a difference: since a
  man is not simply and entirely man, and in virtue of this he is not
  substance. For what man is he owes to other things which are not man.
  But God is simply and entirely God, for He is nothing else than what He
  is, and therefore is, through simple existence, God. Again we apply
  just, a quality, as though it were that of which it is predicated; that
  is, if we say "a just man or just God," we assert that man or God is
  just. But there is a difference, for man is one thing, and a just man is
  another thing. But God is justice itself. So a man or God is said to be
  great, and it would appear that man is substantially great or that God
  is substantially great. But man is merely great; God is greatness.

  The remaining categories are not predicable of God nor yet of created
  things.[ ]  For place is predicated of man or of God--a man is in the
  market-place; God is everywhere--but in neither case is the predicate
  identical with the object of predication. To say "A man is in the
  market" is quite a different thing from saying "he is white or long,"
  or, so to speak, encompassed and determined by some property which
  enables him to be described in terms of his substance; this predicate of
  place simply declares how far his substance is given a particular
  setting amid other things.

  It is otherwise, of course, with God. "He is everywhere" does not mean
  that He is in every place, for He cannot be in any place at all--but
  that every place is present to Him for Him to occupy, although He
  Himself can be received by no place, and therefore He cannot anywhere be
  in a place, since He is everywhere but in no place. It is the same with
  the category of time, as, "A man came yesterday; God is ever." Here
  again the predicate of "coming yesterday" denotes not something
  substantial, but something happening in terms of time. But the
  expression "God is ever" denotes a single Present, summing up His
  continual presence in all the past, in all the present--however that
  term be used--and in all the future. Philosophers say that "ever" may be
  applied to the life of the heavens and other immortal bodies. But as
  applied to God it has a different meaning. He is ever, because "ever" is
  with Him a term of present time, and there is this great difference
  between "now," which is our present, and the divine present. Our present
  connotes changing time and sempiternity; God's present, abiding,
  unmoved, and immoveable, connotes eternity. Add _semper_ to
  _eternity_ and you get the constant, incessant and thereby
  perpetual course of our present time, that is to say, sempiternity.[ ]

  It is just the same with the categories of condition and activity. For
  example, we say "A man runs, clothed," "God rules, possessing all
  things." Here again nothing substantial is asserted of either subject;
  in fact all the categories we have hitherto named arise from what lies
  outside substance, and all of them, so to speak, refer to something
  other than substance. The difference between the categories is easily
  seen by an example. Thus, the terms "man" and "God" refer to the
  substance in virtue of which the subject is--man or God. The term "just"
  refers to the quality in virtue of which the subject is something, viz.
  just; the term "great" to the quantity in virtue of which He is
  something, viz. great. No other category save substance, quality, and
  quantity refer to the substance of the subject. If I say of one "he is
  in the market" or "everywhere," I am applying the category of place,
  which is not a category of the substance, like "just" in virtue of
  justice. So if I say, "he runs, He rules, he is now, He is ever," I make
  reference to activity or time--if indeed God's "ever" can be described
  as time--but not to a category of substance, like "great" in virtue of
  greatness.

  Finally, we must not look for the categories of situation and passivity
  in God, for they simply are not to be found in Him.

  Have I now made clear the difference between the categories? Some denote
  the reality of a thing; others its accidental circumstances; the former
  declare that a thing is something; the latter say nothing about its
  being anything, but simply attach to it, so to speak, something
  external. Those categories which describe a thing in terms of its
  substance may be called substantial categories; when they apply to
  things as subjects they are called accidents. In reference to God, who
  is not a subject at all, it is only possible to employ the category of
  substance.


  [ ] Gilbert de la Porrée in his commentary on the _De Trin._ makes
  Boethius's meaning clear. "Quod igitur in illo substantiam nominamus,
  non est subiectionis ratione quod dicitur, sed ultra omnem quae
  accidentibus est subiecta substantiam est essentia, absque omnibus quae
  possunt accidere solitaria omnino." (Migne, _P.L._ lxiv.  ). Cf. Aug.
  _De Trin._ vii.  .

  [ ] i.e. according to their substance.

  [ ] The doctrine is Augustine's, cf. _De Ciu. Dei_, xi.  , xii.  ; but
  Boethius's use of _sempiternitas_, as well as his word-building, seem to
  be peculiar to himself. Claudianus Mamertus, speaking of applying the
  categories to God, uses _sempiternitas_ as Boethius uses _aeternitas_.
  Cf. _De Statu Animae_ i.  . Apuleius seems to use both terms
  interchangeably, e.g. _Asclep._  - . On Boethius's distinction between
  time and eternity see _Cons._ v. pr.  , and Rand, _i er dem B. zugeschr.
  Trakt. de fide_, pp.   ff, and Brandt in _Theol. Littzg._,  , p.
   .




V.

Age nunc de relatiuis speculemur pro quibus omne quod dictum est sumpsimus
ad disputationem; maxime enim haec non uidentur secundum se facere
praedicationem quae perspicue ex alieno aduentu constare perspiciuntur. Age
enim, quoniam dominus ac seruus relatiua sunt, uideamus utrumne ita sit ut
secundum se sit praedicatio an minime. Atqui si auferas seruum, abstuleris
et dominum; at non etiam si auferas albedinem, abstuleris quoque album, sed
interest, quod albedo accidit albo, qua sublata perit nimirum album. At in
domino, si seruum auferas, perit uocabulum quo dominus uocabatur; sed non
accidit seruus domino ut albedo albo, sed potestas quaedam qua seruus
coercetur. Quae quoniam sublato deperit seruo, constat non eam per se
domino accidere sed per seruorum quodam modo extrinsecus accessum.

Non igitur dici potest praedicationem relatiuam quidquam rei de qua dicitur
secundum se uel addere uel minuere uel mutare. Quae tota non in eo quod est
esse consistit, sed in eo quod est in comparatione aliquo modo se habere,
nec semper ad aliud sed aliquotiens ad idem. Age enim stet quisquam. Ei
igitur si accedam dexter, erit ille sinister ad me comparatus, non quod
ille ipse sinister sit, sed quod ego dexter accesserim. Rursus ego sinister
accedo, item ille fit dexter, non quod ita sit per se dexter uelut albus ac
longus, sed quod me accedente fit dexter atque id quod est a me et ex me
est minime uero ex sese.

Quare quae secundum rei alicuius in eo quod ipsa est proprietatem non
faciunt praedicationem, nihil alternare uel mutare queunt nullamque omnino
uariare essentiam. Quocirca si pater ac filius ad aliquid dicuntur nihilque
aliud ut dictum est differunt nisi sola relatione, relatio uero non
praedicatur ad id de quo praedicatur quasi ipsa sit et secundum rem de qua
dicitur, non faciet alteritatem rerum de qua dicitur, sed, si dici potest,
quo quidem modo id quod uix intellegi potuit interpretatum est, personarum.
Omnino enim magna regulae est ueritas in rebus incorporalibus distantias
effici differentiis non locis. Neque accessisse dici potest aliquid deo, ut
pater fieret; non enim coepit esse umquam pater eo quod substantialis
quidem ei est productio filii, relatiua uero praedicatio patris. Ac si
meminimus omnium in prioribus de deo sententiarum, ita cogitemus
processisse quidem ex deo patre filium deum et ex utrisque spiritum
sanctum; hos, quoniam incorporales sint, minime locis distare. Quoniam uero
pater deus et filius deus et spiritus sanctus deus, deus uero nullas habet
differentias quibus differat ab deo, a nullo eorum differt. Differentiae
uero ubi absunt, abest pluralitas; ubi abest pluralitas, adest unitas.
Nihil autem aliud gigni potuit ex deo nisi deus; et in rebus numerabilibus
repetitio unitatum non facit modis omnibus pluralitatem.  Trium igitur
idonee constituta est unitas.




  V.

  Let us now consider the category of relation, to which all the foregoing
  remarks have been preliminary; for qualities which obviously arise from
  the association of another term do not appear to predicate anything
  concerning the substance of a subject. For instance, master and
  slave[ ] are relative terms; let us see whether either of them are
  predicates of substance. If you suppress the term slave,[ ] you
  simultaneously suppress the term master. On the other hand, though you
  suppress the term whiteness, you do not suppress some white thing,[ ]
  though, of course, if the particular whiteness inhere as an accident in
  the thing, the thing disappears as soon as you suppress the accidental
  quality whiteness. But in the case of master, if you suppress the term
  slave, the term master disappears. But slave is not an accidental
  quality of master, as whiteness is of a white thing; it denotes the
  power which the master has over the slave. Now since the power goes when
  the slave is removed, it is plain that power is no accident to the
  substance of master, but is an adventitious augmentation arising from
  the possession of slaves.

  It cannot therefore be affirmed that a category of relation increases,
  decreases, or alters in any way the substance of the thing to which it
  is applied. The category of relation, then, has nothing to do with the
  essence of the subject; it simply denotes a condition of relativity, and
  that not necessarily to something else, but sometimes to the subject
  itself. For suppose a man standing. If I go up to him on my right and
  stand beside him, he will be left, in relation to me, not because he is
  left in himself, but because I have come up to him on my right. Again,
  if I come up to him on my left, he becomes right in relation to me, not
  because he is right in himself, as he may be white or long, but because
  he is right in virtue of my approach. What he is depends entirely on me,
  and not in the least on the essence of his being.

  Accordingly those predicates which do not denote the essential nature of
  a thing cannot alter, change, or disturb its nature in any way.
  Wherefore if Father and Son are predicates of relation, and, as we have
  said, have no other difference but that of relation, and if relation is
  not asserted of its subject as though it were the subject itself and its
  substantial quality, it will effect no real difference in its subject,
  but, in a phrase which aims at interpreting what we can hardly
  understand, a difference of persons. For it is a canon of absolute truth
  that distinctions in incorporeal things are established by differences
  and not by spatial separation. It cannot be said that God became Father
  by the addition to His substance of some accident; for he never began to
  be Father, since the begetting of the Son belongs to His very substance;
  however, the predicate father, as such, is relative. And if we bear in
  mind all the propositions made concerning God in the previous
  discussion, we shall admit that God the Son proceeded from God the
  Father, and the Holy Ghost from both, and that They cannot possibly be
  spatially different, since They are incorporeal. But since the Father is
  God, the Son is God, and the Holy Spirit is God, and since there are in
  God no points of difference distinguishing Him from God, He differs from
  none of the Others. But where there are no differences there is no
  plurality; where is no plurality there is Unity. Again, nothing but God
  can be begotten of God, and lastly, in concrete enumerations the
  repetition of units does not produce plurality. Thus the Unity of the
  Three is suitably established.


  [ ] _Dominus_ and _seruus_ are similarly used as illustration, _In
  Cat._ (Migne, _P.L._ lxiv.  ).

  [ ] i.e. which is external to the master.

  [ ] i.e. which is external to the whitened thing.




VI.

Sed quoniam nulla relatio ad se ipsum referri potest, idcirco quod ea
secundum se ipsum est praedicatio quae relatione caret, facta quidem est
trinitatis numerositas in eo quod est praedicatio relationis, seruata uero
unitas in eo quod est indifferentia uel substantiae uel operationis uel
omnino eius quae secundum se dicitur praedicationis. Ita igitur substantia
continet unitatem, relatio multiplicat trinitatem; atque ideo sola
singillatim proferuntur atque separatim quae relationis sunt. Nam idem
pater qui filius non est nec idem uterque qui spiritus sanctus. Idem tamen
deus est pater et filius et spiritus sanctus, idem iustus idem bonus idem
magnus idem omnia quae secundum se poterunt praedicari. Sane sciendum est
non semper talem esse relatiuam praedicationem, ut semper ad differens
praedicetur, ut est seruus ad dominum; differunt enim. Nam omne aequale
aequali aequale est et simile simili simile est et idem ei quod est idem
idem est; et similis est relatio in trinitate patris ad filium et utriusque
ad spiritum sanctum ut eius quod est idem ad id quod est idem. Quod si id
in cunctis aliis rebus non potest inueniri, facit hoc cognata caducis rebus
alteritas. Nos uero nulla imaginatione diduci sed simplici intellectu erigi
et ut quidque intellegi potest ita aggredi etiam intellectu oportet.

Sed de proposita quaestione satis dictum est. Nunc uestri normam iudicii
exspectat subtilitas quaestionis; quae utrum recte decursa sit an minime,
uestrae statuet pronuntiationis auctoritas. Quod si sententiae fidei
fundamentis sponte firmissimae opitulante gratia diuina idonea argumentorum
adiumenta praestitimus, illuc perfecti operis laetitia remeabit unde uenit
effectus. Quod si ultra se humanitas nequiuit ascendere, quantum
inbecillitas subtrahit uota supplebunt.




  VI.

  But since no relation can be affirmed of one subject alone, since a
  predication referring to one substance is a predication without
  relation, the manifoldness of the Trinity is secured through the
  category of relation, and the Unity is maintained through the fact that
  there is no difference of substance, or operation, or generally of any
  substantial predicate. So then, the category of substance preserves the
  Unity, that of relation brings about the Trinity. Hence only terms
  belonging to relation may be applied singly to Each. For the Father is
  not the same as the Son, nor is either of Them the same as the Holy
  Spirit. Yet Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are each the same God, the same
  in justice, in goodness, in greatness, and in everything that can be
  predicated of substance. One must not forget that predicates of
  relativity do not always involve relation to something other than the
  subject, as slave involves master, where the two terms are different.
  For equals are equal, like are like, identicals are identical, each with
  other, and the relation of Father to Son, and of both to Holy Spirit is
  a relation of identicals. A relation of this kind is not to be found in
  created things, but that is because of the difference which we know
  attaches to transient objects. We must not in speaking of God let
  imagination lead us astray; we must let the Faculty of pure Knowledge
  lift us up and teach us to know all things as far as they may be
  known.[ ]

  I have now finished the investigation which I proposed. The exactness of
  my reasoning awaits the standard of your judgment; your authority will
  pronounce whether I have seen a straight path to the goal. If, God
  helping me, I have furnished some support in argument to an article
  which stands by itself on the firm foundation of Faith, I shall render
  joyous praise for the finished work to Him from whom the invitation
  comes. But if human nature has failed to reach beyond its limits,
  whatever is lost through my infirmity must be made good by my intention.


  [ ] Cf. _Cons._ v. pr.   and  , especially in pr.   the passage "quare
  in illius summae intellegentiae acumen si possumus erigamur."






ANICII MANLII SEVERINI BOETHII
V.C. ET INL. EXCONS. ORD. PATRICII

AD IOHANNEM DIACONVM

VTRVM PATER ET FILIVS ET SPIRITVS
SANCTVS DE DIVINITATE SVBSTANTIALITER
PRAEDICENTVR

Quaero an pater et filius ac spiritus sanctus de diuinitate substantialiter
praedicentur an alio quolibet modo; uiamque indaginis hinc arbitror esse
sumendam, unde rerum omnium manifestum constat exordium, id est ab ipsis
catholicae fidei fundamentis. Si igitur interrogem, an qui dicitur pater
substantia sit, respondetur esse substantia. Quod si quaeram, an filius
substantia sit, idem dicitur. Spiritum quoque sanctum substantiam esse nemo
dubitauerit. Sed cum rursus colligo patrem filium spiritum sanctum, non
plures sed una occurrit esse substantia. Vna igitur substantia trium nec
separari ullo modo aut disiungi potest nec uelut partibus in unum coniuncta
est, sed est una simpliciter. Quaecumque igitur de diuina substantia
praedicantur, ea tribus oportet esse communia; idque signi erit quae sint
quae de diuinitatis substantia praedicentur, quod quaecumque hoc modo
dicuntur, de singulis in unum collectis tribus singulariter praedicabuntur.
Hoc modo si dicimus: "Pater deus est, filius deus est, spiritus sanctus
deus est," pater filius ac spiritus sanctus unus deus. Si igitur eorum una
deitas una substantia est, licet dei nomen de diuinitate substantialiter
praedicari.

Ita pater ueritas est, filius ueritas est, spiritus sanctus ueritas est;
pater filius et spiritus sanctus non tres ueritates sed una ueritas est. Si
igitur una in his substantia una est ueritas, necesse est ueritatem
substantialiter praedicari. De bonitate de incommutabilitate de iustitia de
omnipotentia ac de ceteris omnibus quae tam de singulis quam de omnibus
singulariter praedicamus manifestum est substantialiter dici. Vnde apparet
ea quae cum in singulis separatim dici conuenit nec tamen in omnibus dici
queunt, non substantialiter praedicari sed alio modo; qui uero iste sit,
posterius quaeram. Nam qui pater est, hoc uocabulum non transmittit ad
filium neque ad spiritum sanctum. Quo fit ut non sit substantiale nomen hoc
inditum; nam si substantiale esset, ut deus ut ueritas ut iustitia ut ipsa
quoque substantia, de ceteris diceretur.

Item filius solus hoc recipit nomen neque cum aliis iungit sicut in deo,
sicut in ueritate, sicut in ceteris quae superius dixi. Spiritus quoque non
est idem qui pater ac filius. Ex his igitur intellegimus patrem ac filium
ac spiritum sanctum non de ipsa diuinitate substantialiter dici sed alio
quodam modo; si enim substantialiter praedicaretur, et de singulis et de
omnibus singulariter diceretur. Haec uero ad aliquid dici manifestum est;
nam et pater alicuius pater est et filius alicuius filius est, spiritus
alicuius spiritus. Quo fit, ut ne trinitas quidem substantialiter de deo
praedicetur; non enim pater trinitas (qui enim pater est, filius ac
spiritus sanctus non est) nec trinitas filius nec trinitas spiritus sanctus
secundum eundem modum, sed trinitas quidem in personarum pluralitate
consistit, unitas uero in substantiae simplicitate.

Quod si personae diuisae sunt, substantia uero indiuisa sit, necesse est
quod uocabulum ex personis originem capit id ad substantiam non pertinere;
at trinitatem personarum diuersitas fecit, trinitas igitur non pertinet ad
substantiam. Quo fit ut neque pater neque filius neque spiritus sanctus
neque trinitas de deo substantialiter praedicetur, sed ut dictum est ad
aliquid. Deus uero ueritas iustitia bonitas omnipotentia substantia
inmutabilitas uirtus sapientia et quicquid huiusmodi excogitari potest
substantialiter de diuinitate dicuntur. Haec si se recte et ex fide habent,
ut me instruas peto; aut si aliqua re forte diuersus es, diligentius
intuere quae dicta sunt et fidem si poterit rationemque coniunge.






  ANICIUS MANLIUS SEVERINUS BOETHIUS

  MOST HONOURABLE, OF THE ILLUSTRIOUS ORDER OF EX-CONSULS, PATRICIAN

  TO JOHN THE DEACON

  WHETHER FATHER, SON, AND HOLY SPIRIT MAY BE SUBSTANTIALLY PREDICATED OF
  THE DIVINITY

  The question before us is whether Father, Son, and Holy Spirit may be
  predicated of the Divinity substantially or otherwise. And I think that
  the method of our inquiry must be borrowed from what is admittedly the
  surest source of all truth, namely, the fundamental doctrines of the
  catholic faith. If, then, I ask whether He who is called Father is a
  substance, the answer will be yes. If I ask whether the Son is a
  substance, the reply will be the same. So, too, no one will hesitate to
  affirm that the Holy Spirit is also a substance. But when, on the other
  hand, I take together all three, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, the
  result is not three substances but one substance. The one substance of
  the Three, then, cannot be separated or divided, nor is it made up of
  various parts, combined into one: it is simply one. Everything,
  therefore, that is affirmed of the divine substance must be common to
  the Three, and we can recognize what predicates may be affirmed of the
  substance of the godhead by this sign, that all those which are affirmed
  of it may also be affirmed severally of each of the Three combined into
  one. For instance if we say "the Father is God, the Son is God, and the
  Holy Spirit is God," then Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are one God. If
  then their one godhead is one substance, the name of God may with right
  be predicated substantially of the Divinity.

  Similarly the Father is truth, the Son is truth, and the Holy Spirit is
  truth; Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are not three truths, but one truth.
  If, then, they are one substance and one truth, truth must of necessity
  be a substantial predicate. So Goodness, Immutability, Justice,
  Omnipotence and all the other predicates which we apply to the Persons
  singly and collectively are plainly substantial predicates. Hence it
  appears that what may be predicated of each single One but not of all
  Three is not a substantial predicate, but of another kind--of what kind
  I will examine presently. For He who is Father does not transmit this
  name to the Son nor to the Holy Spirit. Hence it follows that this name
  is not attached to Him as something substantial; for if it were a
  substantial predicate, as God, truth, justice, or substance itself, it
  would be affirmed of the other Persons.

  Similarly the Son alone receives this name; nor does He associate it
  with the other Persons, as in the case of the titles God, truth, and the
  other predicates which I have already mentioned. The Spirit too is not
  the same as the Father and the Son. Hence we gather that Father, Son,
  and Holy Spirit are not predicated of the Divinity in a substantial
  manner, but otherwise.[ ] For if each term were predicated
  substantially it would be affirmed of the three Persons both separately
  and collectively. It is evident that these terms are relative, for the
  Father is some one's Father, the Son is some one's Son, the Spirit is
  some one's Spirit. Hence not even Trinity may be substantially[ ]
  predicated of God; for the Father is not Trinity--since He who is Father
  is not Son and Holy Spirit--nor yet, by parity of reasoning, is the Son
  Trinity nor the Holy Spirit Trinity, but the Trinity consists in
  diversity of Persons, the Unity in simplicity of substance.

  Now if the Persons are separate, while the Substance is undivided, it
  must needs be that that term which is derived from Persons does not
  belong to Substance. But the Trinity is effected by diversity of
  Persons, wherefore Trinity does not belong to Substance. Hence neither
  Father, nor Son, nor Holy Spirit, nor Trinity can be substantially
  predicated of God, but only relatively, as we have said. But God, Truth,
  Justice, Goodness, Omnipotence, Substance, Immutability, Virtue, Wisdom
  and all other conceivable predicates of the kind are applicable
  substantially to divinity.

  If I am right and speak in accordance with the Faith, I pray you confirm
  me. But if you are in any point of another opinion, examine carefully
  what I have said, and if possible, reconcile faith and reason.[ ]


  [ ] i.e. _personaliter_ (Ioh. Scottus _ad loc._).

  [ ] i.e. _sed personaliter_ (Ioh. Scottus _ad loc._).

  [ ] _Vide supra_, Introduction, p. xii.




ITEM EIVSDEM
AD EVNDEM

QVOMODO SVBSTANTIAE IN EO QVOD
SINT BONAE SINT CVM NON SINT
SVBSTANTIALIA BONA

Postulas, ut ex Hebdomadibus nostris eius quaestionis obscuritatem quae
continet modum quo substantiae in eo quod sint bonae sint, cum non sint
substantialia bona, digeram et paulo euidentius monstrem; idque eo dicis
esse faciendum, quod non sit omnibus notum iter huiusmodi scriptionum. Tuus
uero testis ipse sum quam haec uiuaciter fueris ante complexus. Hebdomadas
uero ego mihi ipse commentor potiusque ad memoriam meam speculata conseruo
quam cuiquam participo quorum lasciuia ac petulantia nihil a ioco risuque
patitur esse seiunctum.[ ] Prohinc tu ne sis obscuritatibus breuitatis
aduersus, quae cum sint arcani fida custodia tum id habent commodi, quod
cum his solis qui digni sunt conloquuntur. Vt igitur in mathematica fieri
solet ceterisque etiam disciplinis, praeposui terminos regulasque quibus
cuncta quae sequuntur efficiam.

I. Communis animi conceptio est enuntiatio quam quisque probat auditam.
Harum duplex modus est. Nam una ita communis est, ut omnium sit hominum,
ueluti si hanc proponas: "Si duobus aequalibus aequalia auferas, quae
relinquantur aequalia esse," nullus id intellegens neget. Alia uero est
doctorum tantum, quae tamen ex talibus communis animi conceptionibus uenit,
ut est: "Quae incorporalia sunt, in loco non esse," et cetera; quae non
uulgus sed docti comprobant.

II. Diuersum est esse et id quod est; ipsum enim esse nondum est, at uero
quod est accepta essendi forma est atque consistit.

III. Quod est participare aliquo potest, sed ipsum esse nullo modo aliquo
participat. Fit enim participatio cum aliquid iam est; est autem aliquid,
cum esse susceperit.

IV. Id quod est habere aliquid praeterquam quod ipsum est potest; ipsum
uero esse nihil aliud praeter se habet admixtum.

V. Diuersum est tantum esse aliquid et esse aliquid in eo quod est; illic
enim accidens hic substantia significatur.

VI. Omne quod est[ ] participat eo quod est esse ut sit; alio uero
participat ut aliquid sit. Ac per hoc id quod est participat eo quod est
esse ut sit; est uero ut participet alio quolibet.

VII. Omne simplex esse suum et id quod est unum habet.

VIII. Omni composito aliud est esse, aliud ipsum est.

IX. Omnis diuersitas discors, similitudo uero appetenda est; et quod
appetit aliud, tale ipsum esse naturaliter ostenditur quale est illud hoc
ipsum quod appetit.

Sufficiunt igitur quae praemisimus; a prudente uero rationis interprete
suis unumquodque aptabitur argumentis.

Quaestio uero huiusmodi est. Ea quae sunt bona sunt; tenet enim communis
sententia doctorum omne quod est ad bonum tendere, omne autem tendit ad
simile. Quae igitur ad bonum tendunt bona ipsa sunt. Sed quemadmodum bona
sint, inquirendum est, utrumne participatione an substantia? Si
participatione, per se ipsa nullo modo bona sunt; nam quod participatione
album est, per se in eo quod ipsum est album non est. Et de ceteris
qualitatibus eodem modo. Si igitur participatione sunt bona, ipsa per se
nullo modo bona sunt: non igitur ad bonum tendunt. Sed concessum est. Non
igitur participatione sunt bona sed substantia. Quorum uero substantia bona
est, id quod sunt bona sunt; id quod sunt autem habent ex eo quod est esse.
Esse igitur ipsorum bonum est; omnium igitur rerum ipsum esse bonum est.
Sed si esse bonum est, ea quae sunt in eo quod sunt bona sunt idemque illis
est esse quod boni esse; substantialia igitur bona sunt, quoniam non
participant bonitatem. Quod si ipsum esse in eis bonum est, non est dubium
quin substantialia cum sint bona, primo sint bono similia ac per hoc hoc
ipsum bonum erunt; nihil enim illi praeter se ipsum simile est. Ex quo fit
ut omnia quae sunt deus sint, quod dictu nefas est. Non sunt igitur
substantialia bona ac per hoc non in his est esse bonum; non sunt igitur in
eo quod sunt bona. Sed nec participant bonitatem; nullo enim modo ad bonum
tenderent. Nullo modo igitur sunt bona.

Huic quaestioni talis poterit adhiberi solutio. Multa sunt quae cum
separari actu non possunt, animo tamen et cogitatione separantur; ut cum
triangulum uel cetera a subiecta materia nullus actu separat, mente tamen
segregans ipsum triangulum proprietatemque eius praeter materiam
speculatur. Amoueamus igitur primi boni praesentiam paulisper ex animo,
quod esse quidem constat idque ex omnium doctorum indoctorumque sententia
barbararumque gentium religionibus cognosci potest. Hoc igitur paulisper
amoto ponamus omnia esse quae sunt bona atque ea consideremus quemadmodum
bona esse possent, si a primo bono minime defluxissent. Hinc intueor aliud
in eis esse quod bona sunt, aliud quod sunt. Ponatur enim una eademque
substantia bona esse alba, grauis, rotunda. Tunc aliud esset ipsa illa
substantia, aliud eius rotunditas, aliud color, aliud bonitas; nam si haec
singula idem essent quod ipsa substantia, idem esset grauitas quod color,
quod bonum et bonum quod grauitas--quod fieri natura non sinit. Aliud
igitur tunc in eis esset esse, aliud aliquid esse, ac tunc bona quidem
essent, esse tamen ipsum minime haberent bonum. Igitur si ullo modo essent,
non a bono ac bona essent ac non idem essent quod bona, sed eis aliud esset
esse aliud bonis esse. Quod si nihil omnino aliud essent nisi bona neque
grauia neque colorata neque spatii dimensione distenta nec ulla in eis
qualitas esset, nisi tantum bona essent, tunc non res sed rerum uideretur
esse principium nec potius uiderentur, sed uideretur; unum enim solumque
est huiusmodi, quod tantum bonum aliudque nihil sit. Quae quoniam non sunt
simplicia, nec esse omnino poterant, nisi ea id quod solum bonum est esse
uoluisset. Idcirco quoniam esse eorum a boni uoluntate defluxit, bona esse
dicuntur. Primum enim bonum, quoniam est, in eo quod est bonum est;
secundum uero bonum, quoniam ex eo fluxit cuius ipsum esse bonum est, ipsum
quoque bonum est. Sed ipsum esse omnium rerum ex eo fluxit quod est primum
bonum et quod bonum tale est ut recte dicatur in eo quod est esse bonum.
Ipsum igitur eorum esse bonum est; tunc enim in eo.

Qua in re soluta quaestio est. Idcirco enim licet in eo quod sint bona
sint, non sunt tamen similia primo bono, quoniam non quoquo modo sint res
ipsum esse earum bonum est, sed quoniam non potest esse ipsum esse rerum,
nisi a primo esse defluxerit, id est bono; idcirco ipsum esse bonum est nec
est simile ei a quo est. Illud enim quoquo modo sit bonum est in eo quod
est; non enim aliud est praeterquam bonum. Hoc autem nisi ab illo esset,
bonum fortasse esse posset, sed bonum in eo quod est esse non posset. Tunc
enim participaret forsitan bono; ipsum uero esse quod non haberent a bono,
bonum habere non possent. Igitur sublato ab his bono primo mente et
cogitatione, ista licet essent bona, tamen in eo quod essent bona esse non
possent, et quoniam actu non potuere exsistere, nisi illud ea quod uere
bonum est produxisset, idcirco et esse eorum bonum est et non est simile
substantiali bono id quod ab eo fluxit; et nisi ab eo fluxissent, licet
essent bona, tamen in eo quod sunt bona esse non possent, quoniam et
praeter bonum et non ex bono essent, cum illud ipsum bonum primum est et
ipsum esse sit et ipsum bonum et ipsum esse bonum. At non etiam alba in eo
quod sunt alba esse oportebit ea quae alba sunt, quoniam ex uoluntate dei
fluxerunt ut essent, alba minime. Aliud est enim esse, aliud albis esse;
hoc ideo, quoniam qui ea ut essent effecit bonus quidem est, minime uero
albus. Voluntatem igitur boni comitatum est ut essent bona in eo quod sunt;
uoluntatem uero non albi non est comitata talis eius quod est proprietas ut
esset album in eo quod est; neque enim ex albi uoluntate defluxerunt.
Itaque quia uoluit esse ea alba qui erat non albus, sunt alba tantum; quia
uero uoluit ea esse bona qui erat bonus, sunt bona in eo quod sunt.
Secundum hanc igitur rationem cuncta oportet esse iusta, quoniam ipse
iustus est qui ea esse uoluit? Ne hoc quidem. Nam bonum esse essentiam,
iustum uero esse actum respicit. Idem autem est in eo esse quod agere; idem
igitur bonum esse quod iustum. Nobis uero non est idem esse quod agere; non
enim simplices sumus. Non est igitur nobis idem bonis esse quod iustis, sed
idem nobis est esse omnibus in eo quod sumus. Bona igitur omnia sunt, non
etiam iusta. Amplius bonum quidem generale est, iustum uero speciale nec
species descendit in omnia. Idcirco alia quidem iusta alia aliud omnia
bona.


[ ] seiunct. _Rand_; coniunct. _codd. opt._; disiunct. _vulg. Vallinus_.

[ ] est _codd. inferiores; om. codd. opt._




  FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME

  HOW SUBSTANCES CAN BE GOOD IN VIRTUE OF THEIR EXISTENCE WITHOUT BEING
  ABSOLUTE GOODS

  You ask me to state and explain somewhat more clearly that obscure
  question in my _Hebdomads_[ ] concerning the manner in which
  substances can be good in virtue of existence without being absolute
  goods.[ ] You urge that this demonstration is necessary because the
  method of this kind of treatise is not clear to all. I can bear witness
  with what eagerness you have already attacked the subject. But I confess
  I like to expound my _Hebdomads_ to myself, and would rather bury
  my speculations in my own memory than share them with any of those pert
  and frivolous persons who will not tolerate an argument unless it is
  made amusing. Wherefore do not you take objection to the obscurity that
  waits on brevity; for obscurity is the sure treasure-house of secret
  doctrine and has the further advantage that it speaks a language
  understood only of those who deserve to understand. I have therefore
  followed the example of the mathematical[ ] and cognate sciences and
  laid down bounds and rules according to which I shall develop all that
  follows.

  I. A common conception is a statement generally accepted as soon as it
  is made. Of these there are two kinds. One is universally intelligible;
  as, for instance, "if equals be taken from equals the remainders are
  equal." Nobody who grasps that proposition will deny it. The other kind
  is intelligible only to the learned, but it is derived from the same
  class of common conceptions; as "Incorporeals cannot occupy space," and
  the like. This is obvious to the learned but not to the common herd.

  II. Being and a concrete thing[ ] are different. Simple Being awaits
  manifestation, but a thing is and exists[ ] as soon as it has received
  the form which gives it Being.

  III. A concrete thing can participate in something else; but absolute
  Being can in no wise participate in anything. For participation is
  effected when a thing already is; but it is something after it has
  acquired Being.

  IV. That which exists can possess something besides itself. But absolute
  Being has no admixture of aught besides Itself.

  V. Merely to be something and to be something absolutely are different;
  the former implies accidents, the latter connotes a substance.

  VI. Everything that is participates in absolute Being[ ] through the
  fact that it exists. In order to be something it participates in
  something else. Hence that which exists participates in absolute Being
  through the fact that it exists, but it exists in order to participate
  in something else.

  VII. Every simple thing possesses as a unity its absolute and its
  particular Being.

  VIII. In every composite thing absolute and individual Being are not one
  and the same.

  IX. Diversity repels; likeness attracts. That which seeks something
  outside itself is demonstrably of the same nature as that which it
  seeks.

  These preliminaries are enough then for our purpose. The intelligent
  interpreter of the discussion will supply the arguments appropriate to
  each point.

  Now the problem is this. Things which are, are good. For all the learned
  are agreed that every existing thing tends to good and everything tends
  to its like. Therefore things which tend to good are good. We must,
  however, inquire how they are good--by participation or by substance. If
  by participation, they are in no wise good in themselves; for a thing
  which is white by participation in whiteness is not white in itself by
  virtue of absolute Being. So with all other qualities. If then they are
  good by participation, they are not good in themselves; therefore they
  do not tend to good. But we have agreed that they do. Therefore they are
  good not by participation but by substance. But those things whose
  substance is good are substantially good. But they owe their actual
  Being to absolute Being. Their absolute Being therefore is good;
  therefore the absolute Being of all things is good. But if their Being
  is good, things which exist are good through the fact that they exist
  and their absolute Being is the same as that of the Good. Therefore they
  are substantial goods, since they do not merely participate in goodness.
  But if their absolute Being is good, there is no doubt but that, since
  they are substantial goods, they are like the First Good and therefore
  they will have to be that Good. For nothing is like It save Itself.
  Hence all things that are, are God--an impious assertion. Wherefore
  things are not substantial goods, and so the essence of the Good does
  not reside in them. Therefore they are not good through the fact that
  they exist. But neither do they receive good by participation, for they
  would in no wise tend to good. Therefore they are in no wise good.[ ]

  This problem admits of the following solution.[ ] There are many things
  which can be separated by a mental process, though they cannot be
  separated in fact. No one, for instance, can actually separate a
  triangle or other mathematical figure from the underlying matter; but
  mentally one can consider a triangle and its properties apart from
  matter. Let us, therefore, remove from our minds for a moment the
  presence of the Prime Good, whose Being is admitted by the universal
  consensus of learned and unlearned opinion and can be deduced from the
  religious beliefs of savage races. The Prime Good having been thus for a
  moment put aside, let us postulate as good all things that are, and let
  us consider how they could possibly be good if they did not derive from
  the Prime Good. This process leads me to perceive that their Goodness
  and their existence are two different things. For let me suppose that
  one and the same substance is good, white, heavy, and round. Then it
  must be admitted that its substance, roundness, colour, and goodness are
  all different things. For if each of these qualities were the same as
  its substance, weight would be the same thing as colour or goodness, and
  goodness would be the same as colour; which is contrary to nature. Their
  Being then in that case would be one thing, their quality another, and
  they would be good, but they would not have their absolute Being good.
  Therefore if they really existed at all, they would not be from good nor
  good, they would not be the same as good, but Being and Goodness would
  be for them two different things. But if they were nothing else but good
  substances, and were neither heavy, nor coloured, and possessed neither
  spatial dimension nor quality, beyond that of goodness, they (or rather
  it) would seem to be not things but the principle of things. For there
  is one thing alone that is by nature good to the exclusion of every
  other quality. But since they are not simple, they could not even exist
  at all unless that which is the one sole Good willed them to be. They
  are called good simply because their Being is derived from the Will of
  the Good. For the Prime Good is essentially good in virtue of Being; the
  secondary good is in its turn good because it derives from the good
  whose absolute Being is good. But the absolute Being of all things
  derives from the Prime Good which is such that of It Being and Goodness
  are rightly predicated as identical. Their absolute Being therefore is
  good; for thereby it resides in Him.

  Thereby the problem is solved. For though things be good through the
  fact that they exist, they are not like the Prime Good, for the simple
  reason that their absolute Being is not good under all circumstances,
  but that things can have no absolute Being unless it derive from the
  Prime Being, that is, the Prime Good; their substance, therefore, is
  good, and yet it is not like that from which it comes. For the Prime
  Good is good through the fact that it exists, irrespective of all
  conditions, for it is nothing else than good; but the second good if it
  derived from any other source might be good, but could not be good
  through the fact that it exists. For in that case it might possibly
  participate in good, but their substantial Being, not deriving from the
  Prime Good, could not have the element of good. Therefore when we have
  put out of mind the Prime Good, these things, though they might be good,
  would not be good through the fact that they exist, and since they could
  not actually exist unless the true good had produced them, therefore
  their Being is good, and yet that which springs from the substantial
  Good is not like its source which produces it. And unless they had
  derived from it, though they were good yet they could not be good
  through the fact that they exist because they were apart from good and
  not derived from good, since that very good is the Prime Good and is
  substantial Being and substantial Good and essential Goodness. But we
  need not say that white things are white through the fact that they
  exist; for they drew their existence from the will of God, but not their
  whiteness. For to be is one thing; to be white is another; and that
  because He who gave them Being is good, but not white. It is therefore
  in accordance with the will of the Good that they should be good through
  the fact that they exist; but it is not in accordance with the will of
  one who is not white that a thing have a certain property making it
  white in virtue of its Being; for it was not the will of One who is
  white that gave them Being. And so they are white simply because One who
  was not white willed them to be white; but they are good through the
  fact that they exist because One who was good willed them to be good.
  Ought, then, by parity of reason, all things to be just because He is
  just who willed them to be? That is not so either. For to be good
  involves Being, to be just involves an act. For Him being and action are
  identical; to be good and to be just are one and the same for Him. But
  being and action are not identical for us, for we are not simple. For
  us, then, goodness is not the same thing as justice, but we all have the
  same sort of Being in virtue of our existence. Therefore all things are
  good, but all things are not just. Finally, good is a general, but just
  is a species, and this species does not apply to all. Wherefore some
  things are just, others are something else, but all things are good.


  [ ] Similarly Porphyry divided the works of Plotinus into six
  _Enneades_ or groups of nine.

  [ ] Cf. discussion on the nature of good in _Cons._ iii. m.   and pr.
    (_infra_, pp.   ff.).

  [ ] On this mathematical method of exposition cf. _Cons._ iii. pr.  
  (_infra_, p.  ).

  [ ] _Esse_ = Aristotle's [Greek: to ti esti]; _id quod est_ = [Greek:
  tode ti].

  [ ] _Consistere_ = [Greek: hypostaenai].

  [ ] _Id quod est esse_ = [Greek: to ti aen einai].

  [ ] Cf. the similar _reductio ad absurdum_ in _Tr._   (_infra_, p.  )
  and in _Cons._ v. pr.   (_infra_, p.  ).

  [ ] _Vide supra_, p.  , n. _b_.




DE FIDE CATHOLICA

Christianam fidem noui ac ueteris testamenti pandit auctoritas; et quamuis
nomen ipsum Christi uetus intra semet continuerit instrumentum eumque
semper signauerit affuturum quem credimus per partum uirginis iam uenisse,
tamen in orbem terrarum ab ipsius nostri saluatoris mirabili manasse
probatur aduentu.

Haec autem religio nostra, quae uocatur christiana atque catholica, his
fundamentis principaliter nititur asserens: ex aeterno, id est ante mundi
constitutionem, ante omne uidelicet quod temporis potest retinere
uocabulum, diuinam patris et filii ac spiritus sancti exstitisse
substantiam, ita ut deum dicat patrem, deum filium, deum spiritum sanctum,
nec tamen tres deos sed unum: patrem itaque habere filium ex sua substantia
genitum et sibi nota ratione coaeternum, quem filium eatenus confitetur, ut
non sit idem qui pater est: neque patrem aliquando fuisse filium, ne rursus
in infinitum humanus animus diuinam progeniem cogitaret, neque filium in
eadem natura qua patri coaeternus est aliquando fieri patrem, ne rursus in
infinitum diuina progenies tenderetur: sanctum uero spiritum neque patrem
esse neque filium atque ideo in illa natura nec genitum nec generantem sed
a patre quoque procedentem uel filio; qui sit tamen processionis istius
modus ita non possumus euidenter dicere, quemadmodum generationem filii ex
paterna substantia non potest humanus animus aestimare. Haec autem ut
credantur uetus ac noua informat instructio. De qua uelut arce religionis
nostrae multi diuersa et humaniter atque ut ita dicam carnaliter sentientes
aduersa locuti sunt, ut Arrius qui licet deum dicat filium, minorem tamen
patre multipliciter et extra patris substantiam confitetur. Sabelliani
quoque non tres exsistentes personas sed unam ausi sunt affirmare, eundem
dicentes patrem esse qui filius est eundemque filium qui pater est atque
spiritum sanctum eundem esse qui pater et filius est; ac per hoc unam
dicunt esse personam sub uocabulorum diuersitate signatam.

Manichaei quoque qui duo principia sibi coaeterna et aduersa profitentur,
unigenitum dei esse non credunt. Indignum enim iudicant, si deus habere
filium uideatur, nihil aliud cogitantes nisi carnaliter, ut quia haec
generatio duorum corporum commixtione procedit, illic quoque indignum esse
intellectum huiusmodi applicare; quae res eos nec uetus facit recipere
testamentum neque in integro nouum. Nam sicut illud omnino error eorum non
recipit ita ex uirgine generationem filii non uult admittere, ne humano
corpore polluta uideatur dei fuisse natura. Sed de his hactenus; suo enim
loco ponentur sicut ordo necessarius postularit.

Ergo diuina ex aeterno natura et in aeternum sine aliqua mutabilitate
perdurans sibi tantum conscia uoluntate sponte mundum uoluit fabricare
eumque cum omnino non esset fecit ut esset, nec ex sua substantia protulit,
ne diuinus natura crederetur, neque aliunde molitus est, ne iam exstitisse
aliquid quod eius uoluntatem exsistentia propriae naturae iuuaret atque
esset quod neque ab ipso factum esset et tamen esset; sed uerbo produxit
caelos, terram creauit, ita ut caelesti habitatione dignas caelo naturas
efficeret ac terrae terrena componeret. De caelestibus autem naturis, quae
uniuersaliter uocatur angelica, quamuis illic distinctis ordinibus pulchra
sint omnia, pars tamen quaedam plus appetens quam ei natura atque ipsius
auctor naturae tribuerat de caelesti sede proiecta est; et quoniam
angelorum numerum, id est supernae illius ciuitatis cuius ciues angeli
sunt, imminutum noluit conditor permanere, formauit ex terra hominem atque
spiritu uitae animauit, ratione composuit, arbitrii libertate decorauit
eumque praefixa lege paradisi deliciis constituit, ut, si sine peccato
manere uellet, tam ipsum quam eius progeniem angelicis coetibus sociaret,
ut quia superior natura per superbiae malum ima petierat, inferior
substantia per humilitatis bonum ad superna conscenderet. Sed ille auctor
inuidiae non ferens hominem illuc ascendere ubi ipse non meruit permanere,
temptatione adhibita fecit etiam ipsum eiusque comparem, quam de eius
latere generandi causa formator produxerat, inoboedientiae suppliciis
subiacere, ei quoque diuinitatem affuturam promittens, quam sibi dum
arroganter usurpat elisus est. Haec autem reuelante deo Moysi famulo suo
comperta sunt, cui etiam humani generis conditionem atque originem uoluit
innotescere, sicut ab eo libri prolati testantur. Omnis enim diuina
auctoritas his modis constare uidetur, ut aut historialis modus sit, qui
nihil aliud nisi res gestas enuntiet, aut allegoricus, ut non illic possit
historiae ordo consistere, aut certe ex utrisque compositus, ut et secundum
historiam et secundum allegoriam manere uideatur. Haec autem pie
intelligentibus et ueraci corde tenentibus satis abundeque relucent. Sed ad
ordinem redeamus.

Primus itaque homo ante peccatum cum sua coniuge incola paradisi fuit. At
ubi aurem praebuit suasori et conditoris praeceptum neglexit attendere,
exul effectus, terram iussus excolere atque a paradisi sinu seclusus in
ignotis partibus sui generis posteritatem transposuit atque poenam quam
ipse primus homo praeuaricationis reus exceperat generando transmisit in
posteros. Hinc factum est ut et corporum atque animarum corruptio et mortis
proueniret interitus primusque mortem in Abel filio suo meruit experiri, ut
quanta esset poena quam ipse exceperit probaret in subole. Quod si ipse
primus moreretur, nesciret quodam modo ac, si dici fas est, nec sentiret
poenam suam, sed ideo expertus in altero est, ut quid sibi iure deberetur
contemptor agnosceret et dum poenam mortis sustinet, ipsa exspectatione
fortius torqueretur. Hoc autem praeuaricationis malum, quod in posteros
naturaliter primus homo transfuderat, quidam Pelagius non admittens proprii
nominis haeresim dedicauit, quam catholica fides a consortio sui mox
reppulisse probatur. Ab ipso itaque primo homine procedens humanum genus ac
multiplici numerositate succrescens erupit in lites, commouit bella,
occupauit terrenam miseriam quia[ ] felicitatem paradisi in primo patre
perdiderat. Nec tamen ex his defuerunt quos sibi conditor gratiae
sequestraret eiusque placitis inseruirent; quos licet meritum naturae
damnaret, futuri tamen sacramenti et longe postmodum proferendi faciendo
participes perditam uoluit reparare naturam. Impletus est ergo mundus
humano genere atque ingressus est homo uias suas qui malitia propriae
contumaciae despexerat conditorem. Hinc uolens deus per iustum potius
hominem reparare genus humanum quam manere proteruum, poenalem multitudinem
effusa diluuii inundatione excepto Noe iusto homine cum suis liberis atque
his quae secum in arcam introduxerat interire permisit. Cur autem per arcae
lignum uoluerit iustos eripere, notum est diuinarum scripturarum mentibus
eruditis. Et quasi prima quaedam mundi aetas diluuio ultore transacta est.

Reparatur itaque humanum genus atque propriae naturae uitium, quod
praeuaricationis primus auctor infuderat, amplecti non destitit. Creuitque
contumacia quam dudum diluuii unda puniuerat et qui numerosam annorum
seriem permissus fuerat uiuere, in breuitate annorum humana aetas addicta
est. Maluitque deus non iam diluuio punire genus humanum, sed eodem
permanente eligere uiros per quorum seriem aliqua generatio commearet, ex
qua nobis filium proprium uestitum humano corpore mundi in fine concederet.
Quorum primus est Abraham, qui cum esset aetate confectus eiusque uxor
decrepita, in senectute sua repromissionis largitione habere filium
meruerunt. Hic uocatus est Isaac atque ipse genuit Iacob. Idem quoque
duodecim patriarchas non reputante deo in eorum numero quos more suo natura
produxerat. Hic ergo Iacob cum filiis ac domo sua transigendi causa
Aegyptum uoluit habitare atque illic per annorum seriem multitudo
concrescens coeperunt suspicioni esse[ ] Aegyptiacis imperiis eosque
Pharao magna ponderum mole premi decreuerat et grauibus oneribus
affligebat. Tandem deus Aegyptii regis dominationem despiciens diuiso mari
rubro, quod numquam antea natura ulla cognouerat, suum transduxit exercitum
auctore Moyse et Aaron. Postea igitur pro eorum egressione altis Aegyptus
plagis uastata est, cum nollet dimittere populum. Transmisso itaque ut
dictum est mari rubro uenit per deserta eremi ad montem qui uocatur Sinai,
ibique uniuersorum conditor deus uolens sacramenti futuri gratia populos
erudire per Moysen data lege constituit, quemadmodum et sacrificiorum ritus
et populorum mores instruerentur. Et cum multis annis multas quoque gentes
per uiam debellassent, uenerunt tandem ad fluuium qui uocatur Iordanis duce
iam Iesu Naue filio atque ad eorum transitum quemadmodum aquae maris rubri
ita quoque Iordanis fluenta siccata sunt; peruentumque est ad eam ciuitatem
quae nunc Hierosolyma uocatur. Atque dum ibi dei populus moraretur, post
iudices et prophetas reges instituti leguntur, quorum post Saulem primatum
Dauid de tribu Iuda legitur adeptus fuisse. Descendit itaque ab eo per
singulas successiones regium stemma perductumque est usque ad Herodis
tempora, qui primus ex gentilibus memoratis populis legitur imperasse. Sub
quo exstitit beata uirgo Maria quae de Dauidica stirpe prouenerat, quae
humani generis genuit conditorem. Hoc autem ideo quia multis infectus
criminibus mundus iacebat in morte, electa est una gens in qua dei mandata
clarescerent, ibique missi prophetae sunt et alii sancti uiri per quorum
admonitionem ipse certe populus a tumore peruicaciae reuocaretur. Illi uero
eosdem occidentes in suae nequitiae peruersitate manere uoluerunt.

Atque iam in ultimis temporibus non prophetas neque alios sibi placitos sed
ipsum unigenitum suum deus per uirginem nasci constituit, ut humana salus
quae per primi hominis inoboedientiam deperierat per hominem deum rursus
repararetur et quia exstiterat mulier quae causam mortis prima uiro
suaserat, esset haec secunda mulier quae uitae causam humanis uisceribus
apportaret. Nec uile uideatur quod dei filius ex uirgine natus est, quoniam
praeter naturae modum conceptus et editus est. Virgo itaque de spiritu
sancto incarnatum dei filium concepit, uirgo peperit, post eius editionem
uirgo permansit; atque hominis factus est idemque dei filius, ita ut in eo
et diuinae naturae radiaret splendor et humanae fragilitatis appareret
assumptio. Sed huic tam sanae atque ueracissimae fidei exstiterant multi
qui diuersa garrirent et praeter alios Nestorius et Eutyches repertores
haereseos exstiterunt, quorum unus hominem solum, alter deum solum putauit
asserere nec humanum corpus quod Christus induerat de humanae substantiae
participatione uenisse. Sed haec hactenus.

Creuit itaque secundum carnem Christus, baptizatus est, ut qui baptizandi
formam erat ceteris tributurus, ipse primus quod docebat exciperet. Post
baptismum uero elegit duodecim discipulos, quorum unus traditor eius fuit.
Et quia sanam doctrinam Iudaeorum populus non ferebat, eum inlata manu
crucis supplicio peremerunt. Occiditur ergo Christus, iacet tribus diebus
ac noctibus in sepulcro, resurgit a mortuis, sicut ante constitutionem
mundi ipse cum patre decreuerat, ascendit in caelos ubi, in eo quod dei
filius est, numquam defuisse cognoscitur, ut assumptum hominem, quem
diabolus non permiserat ad superna conscendere, secum dei filius caelesti
habitationi sustolleret. Dat ergo formam discipulis suis baptizandi,
docendi salutaria, efficientiam quoque miraculorum atque in uniuersum
mundum ad uitam praecipit introire, ut praedicatio salutaris non iam in una
tantum gente sed orbi terrarum praedicaretur. Et quoniam humanum genus
naturae merito, quam ex primo praeuaricatore contraxerat, aeternae poenae
iaculis fuerat uulneratum nec salutis suae erat idoneum, quod eam in
parente perdiderat, medicinalia quaedam tribuit sacramenta, ut agnosceret
aliud sibi deberi per naturae meritum, aliud per gratiae donum, ut natura
nihil aliud nisi poenae summitteret, gratia uero, quae nullis meritis
attributa est, quia nec gratia diceretur si meritis tribueretur, totum quod
est salutis afferret.

Diffunditur ergo per mundum caelestis illa doctrina, adunantur populi,
instituuntur ecclesiae, fit unum corpus quod mundi latitudinem occuparet,
cuius caput Christus ascendit in caelos, ut necessario caput suum membra
sequerentur. Haec itaque doctrina et praesentem uitam bonis informat
operibus et post consummationem saeculi resurrectura corpora nostra praeter
corruptionem ad regna caelestia pollicetur, ita ut qui hic bene ipso
donante uixerit, esset in illa resurrectione beatissimus, qui uero male,
miser post munus resurrectionis adesset. Et hoc est principale religionis
nostrae, ut credat non solum animas non perire, sed ipsa quoque corpora,
quae mortis aduentus resoluerat, in statum pristinum futura de beatitudine
reparari. Haec ergo ecclesia catholica per orbem diffusa tribus modis
probatur exsistere: quidquid in ea tenetur, aut auctoritas est scripturarum
aut traditio uniuersalis aut certe propria et particularis instructio. Sed
auctoritate tota constringitur, uniuersali traditione maiorum nihilominus
tota, priuatis uero constitutionibus et propriis informationibus unaquaeque
uel pro locorum uarietate uel prout cuique bene uisum est subsistit et
regitur. Sola ergo nunc est fidelium exspectatio qua credimus affuturum
finem mundi, omnia corruptibilia transitura, resurrecturos homines ad
examen futuri iudicii, recepturos pro meritis singulos et in perpetuum
atque in aeternum debitis finibus permansuros; solumque est[ ] praemium
beatitudinis contemplatio conditoris--tanta dumtaxat, quanta a creatura ad
creatorem fieri potest,--ut ex eis reparato angelico numero superna illa
ciuitas impleatur, ubi rex est uirginis filius eritque gaudium sempiternum,
delectatio, cibus, opus, laus perpetua creatoris.


[ ] qui _uel_ quod _codd._

[ ] suspiciones _uel_ suspicione _uel_ suspicio _uel_ subici _codd.
meliores._

[ ] esse _codd_.




  ON THE CATHOLIC FAITH[ ]

  The Christian Faith is proclaimed by the authority of the New Testament
  and of the Old; but although the Old scripture[ ] contains within its
  pages the name of Christ and constantly gives token that He will come
  who we believe has already come by the birth of the Virgin, yet the
  diffusion of that faith throughout the world dates from the actual
  miraculous coming of our Saviour.

  Now this our religion which is called Christian and Catholic is founded
  chiefly on the following assertions. From all eternity, that is, before
  the world was established, and so before all that is meant by time
  began, there has existed one divine substance of Father, Son, and Holy
  Spirit in such wise that we confess the Father God, the Son God, and the
  Holy Spirit God, and yet not three Gods but one God. Thus the Father
  hath the Son, begotten of His substance and coeternal with Himself after
  a manner that He alone knoweth. Him we confess to be Son in the sense
  that He is not the same as the Father. Nor has the Father ever been Son,
  for the human mind must not imagine a divine lineage stretching back
  into infinity; nor can the Son, being of the same nature in virtue of
  which He is coeternal with the Father, ever become Father, for the
  divine lineage must not stretch forward into infinity. But the Holy
  Spirit is neither Father nor Son, and therefore, albeit of the same
  divine nature, neither begotten, nor begetting, but proceeding as well
  from the Father as the Son.[ ] Yet what the manner of that Procession
  is we are no more able to state clearly than is the human mind able to
  understand the generation of the Son from the substance of the Father.
  But these articles are laid down for our belief by Old and New
  Testament. Concerning which fortress and citadel[ ] of our religion
  many men have spoken otherwise and have even impugned it, being moved by
  human, nay rather by carnal feeling. Arius, for instance, who, while
  calling the Son God, declares Him to be vastly inferior to the Father
  and of another substance. The Sabellians also have dared to affirm that
  there are not three separate Persons but only One, saying that the
  Father is the same as the Son and the Son the same as the Father and the
  Holy Spirit the same as the Father and the Son; and so declaring that
  there is but one divine Person expressed by different names.

  The Manichaeans, too, who allow two coeternal and contrary principles,
  do not believe in the Only-begotten Son of God. For they consider it a
  thought unworthy of God that He should have a Son, since they entertain
  the very carnal reflection that inasmuch as[ ] human generation arises
  from the mingling of two bodies, it is unworthy to hold a notion of this
  sort in respect of the divine nature; whereas such a view finds no
  sanction in the Old Testament and absolutely[ ] none in the New. Yea,
  their error which refuses this notion also refuses the Virgin birth of
  the Son, because they would not have the God's nature defiled by the
  man's body. But enough of this for the present; the points will be
  presented in the proper place as the proper arrangement demands.

  The divine nature then, abiding from all eternity and unto all eternity
  without any change, by the exercise of a will known only to Himself,
  determined of Himself to form the world, and brought it into being when
  it was absolutely naught, nor did He produce it from His own substance,
  lest it should be thought divine by nature, nor did He form it after any
  model, lest it should be thought that anything had already come into
  being which helped His will by the existence of an independent nature,
  and that there should exist something that had not been made by Him and
  yet existed; but by His Word He brought forth the heavens, and created
  the earth[ ] that so He might make natures worthy of a place in heaven,
  and also fit earthly things to earth. But although in heaven all things
  are beautiful and arranged in due order, yet one part of the heavenly
  creation which is universally termed angelic,[ ] seeking more than
  nature and the Author of Nature had granted them, was cast forth from
  its heavenly habitation; and because the Creator did not wish the roll
  of the angels, that is of the heavenly city whose citizens the angels
  are, to be diminished, He formed man out of the earth and breathed into
  him the breath of life; He endowed him with reason, He adorned him with
  freedom of choice and established him in the joys of Paradise, making
  covenant aforehand that if he would remain without sin He would add him
  and his offspring to the angelic hosts; so that as the higher nature had
  fallen low through the curse of pride, the lower substance might ascend
  on high through the blessing of humility. But the father of envy, loath
  that man should climb to the place where he himself deserved not to
  remain, put temptation before him and the consort whom the Creator had
  brought forth out of his side for the continuance of the race, and laid
  them open to punishment for disobedience, promising man also the gift of
  Godhead, the arrogant attempt to seize which had caused his own fall.
  All this was revealed by God to His servant Moses, whom He vouchsafed to
  teach the creation and origin of man, as the books written by him
  declare. For the divine authority is always conveyed in one of the
  following ways--the historical, which simply announces facts; the
  allegorical, whence historical matter is excluded; or else the two
  combined, history and allegory conspiring to establish it. All this is
  abundantly evident to pious hearers and steadfast believers.

  But to return to the order of our discourse; the first man, before sin
  came, dwelt with his consort in the Garden. But when he hearkened to the
  voice of his wife and failed to keep the commandment of his Creator, he
  was banished, bidden to till the ground, and being shut out from the
  sheltering garden he carried abroad into unknown regions the children of
  his loins; by begetting whom he transmitted to those that came after,
  the punishment which he, the first man, had incurred by the sin of
  disobedience. Hence it came to pass that corruption both of body and
  soul ensued, and death; and this he was to taste first in his own son
  Abel, in order that he might learn through his child the greatness of
  the punishment that was laid upon him. For if he had died first he would
  in some sense not have known, and if one may so say not have felt, his
  punishment; but he tasted it in another in order that he might perceive
  the due reward of his contempt, and, doomed to death himself, might be
  the more sensibly touched by the apprehension of it. But this curse that
  came of transgression which the first man had by natural propagation
  transmitted to posterity, was denied by one Pelagius who so set up the
  heresy which goes by his name and which the Catholic faith, as is known,
  at once banished from its bosom. So the human race that sprang from the
  first man and mightily increased and multiplied, broke into strife,
  stirred up wars, and became the heir of earthly misery, because it had
  lost the joys of Paradise in its first parent. Yet were there not a few
  of mankind whom the Giver of Grace set apart for Himself and who were
  obedient to His will; and though by desert of nature they were
  condemned, yet God by making them partakers in the hidden mystery, long
  afterwards to be revealed, vouchsafed to recover fallen nature. So the
  earth was filled by the human race and man who by his own wanton
  wilfulness had despised his Creator began to walk in his own ways. Hence
  God willing rather to recover mankind through one just man than that it
  should remain for ever contumacious, suffered all the guilty multitude
  to perish by the wide waters of a flood, save only Noah, the just one,
  with his children and all that he had brought with him into the ark. The
  reason why He wished to save the just by an ark of wood is known to all
  hearts learned in the Holy Scriptures. Thus what we may call the first
  age of the world was ended by the avenging flood.

  Thus the human race was restored, and yet it hastened to make its own
  the vice of nature with which the first author of transgression had
  infected it. And the wickedness increased which had once been punished
  by the waters of the flood, and man who had been suffered to live for a
  long series of years was reduced to the brief span of ordinary human
  life. Yet would not God again visit the race by a flood, but rather,
  letting it continue, He chose from it men of whose line a generation
  should arise out of which He might in the last days grant us His own Son
  to come to us, clothed in human form. Of these men Abraham is the first,
  and although he was stricken in years and his wife past bearing, they
  had in their old age the reward of a son in fulfilment of promise
  unconditional. This son was named Isaac and he begat Jacob, who in his
  turn begat the twelve Patriarchs, God not reckoning in their number
  those whom nature in its ordinary course produced.[ ] This Jacob, then,
  together with his sons and his household determined to dwell in Egypt
  for the purpose of trafficking; and the multitude of them increasing
  there in the course of many years began to be a cause of suspicion to
  the Egyptian rulers, and Pharaoh ordered them to be oppressed by
  exceeding heavy tasks[ ] and afflicted them with grievous burdens. At
  length God, minded to set at naught the tyranny of the king of Egypt,
  divided the Red Sea--a marvel such as nature had never known before--and
  brought forth His host by the hands of Moses and Aaron. Thereafter on
  account of their departure Egypt was vexed with sore plagues, because
  they would not let the people go. So, after crossing the Red Sea, as I
  have told, they passed through the desert of the wilderness and came to
  the mount which is called Sinai, where God the Creator of all, wishing
  to prepare the nations for the knowledge of the sacrament to come, laid
  down by a law given through Moses how both the rites of sacrifices and
  the national customs should be ordered. And after fighting down many
  tribes in many years amidst their journeyings they came at last to the
  river called Jordan, with Joshua the son of Nun now as their captain,
  and, for their crossing, the streams of Jordan were dried up as the
  waters of the Red Sea had been; so they finished their course to that
  city which is now called Jerusalem. And while the people of God abode
  there we read that there were set up first judges and prophets and then
  kings, of whom we read that after Saul, David of the tribe of Judah
  ascended the throne. So from him the royal race descended from father to
  son and lasted till the days of Herod who, we read, was the first taken
  out of the peoples called Gentile to bear sway. In whose days rose up
  the blessed Virgin Mary, sprung from the stock of David, she who bore
  the Maker of the human race. But it was just because the whole world lay
  dead, stained with its many sins, that God chose out one race in which
  His commands might shine clear; sending it prophets and other holy men,
  to the end that by their warnings that people at least might be cured of
  their swollen pride. But they slew these holy men and chose rather to
  abide in their wanton wickedness.

  And now at the last days of time, in place of prophets and other men
  well-pleasing to Him, God willed that His only-begotten Son should be
  born of a Virgin that so the salvation of mankind which had been lost
  through the disobedience of the first man might be recovered by the God-
  man, and that inasmuch as it was a woman who had first persuaded man to
  that which wrought death there should be this second woman who should
  bring forth from a human womb Him who gives Life. Nor let it be deemed a
  thing unworthy that the Son of God was born of a Virgin, for it was out
  of the course of nature that He was conceived and brought to birth.
  Virgin then she conceived, by the Holy Spirit, the Son of God made
  flesh, Virgin she bore Him, Virgin she continued after His birth; and He
  became the Son of Man and likewise the Son of God that in Him the glory
  of the divine nature might shine forth and at the same time the human
  weakness be declared which He took upon Him. Yet against this article of
  Faith so wholesome and altogether true there rose up many who babbled
  other doctrine, and especially Nestorius and Eutyches, inventors of
  heresy, of whom the one thought fit to say that He was man alone, the
  other that He was God alone and that the human body put on by Christ had
  not come by participation in human substance. But enough on this point.

  So Christ grew after the flesh, and was baptized in order that He who
  was to give the form of baptism to others should first Himself receive
  what He taught. But after His baptism He chose twelve disciples, one of
  whom betrayed Him. And because the people of the Jews would not bear
  sound doctrine they laid hands upon Him and slew and crucified Him.
  Christ, then, was slain; He lay three days and three nights in the tomb;
  He rose again from the dead as He had predetermined with His Father
  before the foundation of the world; He ascended into heaven whence we
  know that He was never absent, because He is Son of God, in order that
  as Son of God He might raise together with Him to the heavenly
  habitation man whose flesh He had assumed, whom the devil had hindered
  from ascending to the places on high. Therefore He bestowed on His
  disciples the form of baptizing, the saving truth of the teaching, and
  the mighty power of miracles, and bade them go throughout the whole
  world to give it life, in order that the message of salvation might be
  preached no longer in one nation only but among all the dwellers upon
  earth. And because the human race was wounded by the weapon of eternal
  punishment by reason of the nature which they had inherited from the
  first transgressor and could not win a full meed of salvation because
  they had lost it in its first parent, God instituted certain health-
  giving sacraments to teach the difference between what grace bestowed
  and human nature deserved, nature simply subjecting to punishment, but
  grace, which is won by no merit, since it would not be grace if it were
  due to merit, conferring all that belongs to salvation.

  Therefore is that heavenly instruction spread throughout the world, the
  peoples are knit together, churches are founded, and, filling the broad
  earth, one body formed, whose head, even Christ, ascended into heaven in
  order that the members might of necessity follow where the Head was
  gone. Thus this teaching both inspires this present life unto good
  works, and promises that in the end of the age our bodies shall rise
  incorruptible to the kingdom of heaven, to the end that he who has lived
  well on earth by God's gift should be altogether blessed in that
  resurrection, but he who has lived amiss should, with the gift of
  resurrection, enter upon misery. And this is a firm principle of our
  religion, to believe not only that men's souls do not perish, but that
  their very bodies, which the coming of death had destroyed, recover
  their first state by the bliss that is to be. This Catholic church,
  then, spread throughout the world, is known by three particular marks:
  whatever is believed and taught in it has the authority of the
  Scriptures, or of universal tradition, or at least of its own and proper
  usage. And this authority is binding on the whole Church as is also the
  universal tradition of the Fathers, while each separate church exists
  and is governed by its private constitution and its proper rites
  according to difference of locality and the good judgment of each. All,
  therefore, that the faithful now expect is that the end of the world
  will come, that all corruptible things shall pass away, that men shall
  rise for future judgement, that each shall receive reward according to
  his deserts and abide in the lot assigned to him for ever and for aye;
  and the sole reward of bliss will be the contemplation of the Almighty,
  so far, that is, as the creature may look on the Creator, to the end
  that the number of the angels may be made up from these and the heavenly
  city filled where the Virgin's Son is King and where will be everlasting
  joy, delight, food, labour, and unending praise of the Creator.


  [ ] The conclusions adverse to the genuineness of this tractate,
  reached in the dissertation _Der dem Boethius zugeschriebene Traktat de
  Fide Catholica (Jahrbücher für kl. Phil._ xxvi. ( ) Supplementband)
  by one of the editors, now seem to both unsound. The writer of that
  dissertation intends to return to the subject elsewhere. This fourth
  tractate, though lacking, in the best MSS., either an ascription to
  Boethius or a title, is firmly imbedded in two distinct recensions of
  Boethius's theological works. There is no reason to disturb it. Indeed
  the _capita dogmatica_ mentioned by Cassiodorus can hardly refer to any
  of the tractates except the fourth.

  [ ] For _instrumentum_=Holy Scripture cf. Tertull. _Apol._  ,  ,
  _adv. Hermog._  , etc.; for _instrumentum_=any historical writing cf.
  Tert. _De Spect._  .

  [ ] Boethius is no heretic. By the sixth century _uel_ had lost its
  strong separative force. Cp. "Noe cum sua uel trium natorum coniugibus,"
  Greg. Tur. _H.F._ i.  . Other examples in Bonnet, _La Latinité de Grég.
  de Tours_, p.  , and in Brandt's edition of the _Isag._ Index, s.v.
  _uel_.

  [ ] _Vide Cons._ i. pr.   (_infra_, p.  ), and cf. Dante, _De Mon._
  iii.  ,  .

  [ ] _Ut quia_. A very rare use. Cf. Baehrens, _Beiträge zur lat.
  Syntaxis_ (_Philologus_, Supplementband xii.  ). It
  perhaps=Aristotle's [Greek: oion epei]. Cf. McKinlay, _Harvard Studies
  in Cl. Philol._ xviii.  .

  [ ] _In integro_=_prorsus_; cf. Brandt, _op. cit._ Index, s.v.
  _integer_.

  [ ] The doctrine is orthodox, but note that Boethius does not say _ex
  nihilo creauit_. _Vide infra_, p.   ll.   ff.

  [ ] _Vide infra, Cons._ iv. pr.  , p.   l.  .

  [ ] e.g. Ishmael also [Greek: kata sarka gegennaetai] Gal. iv.  .

  [ ] Cf. "populus dei mirabiliter crescens ... quia ... erant
  suspecta... laboribus premebatur," Aug. _De Ciu. Dei_,  .  . For other
  coincidences see Rand, _op. cit._ pp.   ff.






ANICII MANLII SEVERINI BOETHII
V.C. ET INL. EXCONS. ORD. PATRICII

INCIPIT LIBER
CONTRA EVTYCHEN ET NESTORIVM

DOMINO SANCTO AC VENERABILI PATRI IOHANNI DIACONO
BOETHIVS FILIVS

Anxie te quidem diuque sustinui, ut de ea quae in conuentu mota est
quaestione loqueremur. Sed quoniam et tu quominus uenires occupatione
distractus es et ego in crastinum constitutis negotiis implicabor, mando
litteris quae coram loquenda seruaueram. Meministi enim, cum in concilio
legeretur epistola, recitatum Eutychianos ex duabus naturis Christum
consistere confiteri, in duabus negare: catholicos uero utrique dicto fidem
praebere, nam et ex duabus eum naturis consistere et in duabus apud uerae
fidei sectatores aequaliter credi. Cuius dicti nouitate percussus harum
coniunctionum quae ex duabus naturis uel in duabus consisterent
differentias inquirebam, multum scilicet referre ratus nec inerti
neglegentia praetereundum, quod episcopus scriptor epistolae tamquam ualde
necessarium praeterire noluisset. Hic omnes apertam esse differentiam nec
quicquam in eo esse caliginis inconditum confusumque strepere nec ullus in
tanto tumultu qui leuiter attingeret quaestionem, nedum qui expediret
inuentus est.

Adsederam ego ab eo quem maxime intueri cupiebam longius atque adeo, si
situm sedentium recorderis, auersus pluribusque oppositis, ne si aegerrime
quidem cuperem, uultum nutumque eius aspicere poteram ex quo mihi aliqua
eius darentur signa iudicii. Atqui ego quidem nihil ceteris amplius
afferebam, immo uero aliquid etiam minus. Nam de re proposita aeque nihil
ceteris sentiebam; minus uero quam ceteri ipse afferebam, falsae scilicet
scientiae praesumptionem. Tuli aegerrime, fateor, compressusque indoctorum
grege conticui metuens ne iure uiderer insanus, si sanus inter furiosos
haberi contenderem. Meditabar igitur dehinc omnes animo quaestiones nec
deglutiebam quod acceperam, sed frequentis consilii iteratione ruminabam.
Tandem igitur patuere pulsanti animo fores et ueritas inuenta quaerenti
omnes nebulas Eutychiani reclusit erroris. Vnde mihi maxime subiit
admirari, quaenam haec indoctorum hominum esset audacia qui inscientiae
uitium praesumptionis atque inpudentiae nube conentur obducere, cum non
modo saepe id quod proponatur ignorent, uerum in huiusmodi contentionibus
ne id quidem quod ipsi loquantur intellegant, quasi non deterior fiat
inscientiae causa, dum tegitur.

Sed ab illis ad te transeo, cui hoc quantulumcumque est examinandum prius
perpendendumque transmitto. Quod si recte se habere pronuntiaueris, peto ut
mei nominis hoc quoque inseras chartis; sin uero uel minuendum aliquid uel
addendum uel aliqua mutatione uariandum est, id quoque postulo remitti,
meis exemplaribus ita ut a te reuertitur transcribendum. Quae ubi ad calcem
ducta constiterint, tum demum eius cuius soleo iudicio censenda
transmittam. Sed quoniam semel res a conlocutione transfertur ad stilum,
prius extremi sibique contrarii Nestorii atque Eutychis summoueantur
errores; post uero adiuuante deo, Christianae medietatem fidei temperabo.
Quoniam uero in tota quaestione contrariarum sibimet [Greek: haireseon] de
personis dubitatur atque naturis, haec primitus definienda sunt et propriis
differentiis segreganda.






  A TREATISE AGAINST EUTYCHES AND NESTORIUS

  BY ANICIUS MANLIUS SEVERINUS BOETHIUS MOST HONOURABLE, OF THE ILLUSTRIOUS
  ORDER OF EX-CONSULS, PATRICIAN

  TO HIS SAINTLY MASTER AND REVEREND FATHER JOHN THE DEACON
  HIS SON BOETHIUS

  I have been long and anxiously waiting for you to discuss with me the
  problem which was raised at the meeting. But since your duties have
  prevented your coming and I shall be for some time involved in my
  business engagements, I am setting down in writing what I had been
  keeping to say by word of mouth.

  You no doubt remember how, when the letter[ ] was read in the assembly,
  it was asserted that the Eutychians confess that Christ is formed from
  two natures but does not consist of them--whereas Catholics admit both
  propositions, for among followers of the true Faith He is equally
  believed to be of two natures and in two natures. Struck by the novelty
  of this assertion I began to inquire what difference there can be
  between unions formed from two natures and unions which consist in two
  natures, for the point which the bishop who wrote the letter refused to
  pass over because of its gravity, seemed to me of importance and not one
  to be idly and carelessly slurred over. On that occasion all loudly
  protested that the difference was evident, that there was no obscurity,
  confusion or perplexity, and in the general storm and tumult there was
  no one who really touched the edge of the problem, much less anyone who
  solved it.

  I was sitting a long way from the man whom I especially wished to
  watch,[ ] and if you recall the arrangement of the seats, I was turned
  away from him, with so many between us, that however much I desired it I
  could not see his face and expression and glean therefrom any sign of
  his opinion. Personally, indeed, I had nothing more to contribute than
  the rest, in fact rather less than more. I, no more than the others, had
  any view about the question at issue, while my possible contribution was
  less by one thing, namely, the false assumption of a knowledge that I
  had not got. I was, I admit, much put out, and being overwhelmed by the
  mob of ignorant speakers, I held my peace, fearing lest I should be
  rightly set down as insane if I held out for being sane among those
  madmen.[ ] So I continued to ponder all the questions in my mind, not
  swallowing what I had heard, but rather chewing the cud of constant
  meditation. At last the door opened to my insistent knocking, and the
  truth which I found cleared out of my way all the clouds of the
  Eutychian error. And with this discovery a great wonder came upon me at
  the vast temerity of unlearned men who use the cloak of impudent
  presumption to cover up the vice of ignorance, for not only do they
  often fail to grasp the point at issue, but in a debate of this kind
  they do not even understand their own statements, forgetting that the
  case of ignorance is all the worse if it is not honestly admitted.[ ]

  I turn from them to you, and to you I submit this little essay for your
  first judgment and consideration. If you pronounce it to be sound I beg
  you to place it among the other writings of mine which you possess; but
  if there is anything to be struck out or added or changed in any way, I
  would ask you to let me have your suggestions, in order that I may enter
  them in my copies just as they leave your hands. When this revision has
  been duly accomplished, then I will send the work on to be judged by the
  man to whom I always submit everything.[ ] But since the pen is now to
  take the place of the living voice, let me first clear away the extreme
  and self-contradictory errors of Nestorius and Eutyches; after that, by
  God's help, I will temperately set forth the middle way of the Christian
  Faith. But since in this whole question of self-contradictory heresies
  the matter of debate is Persons and Natures, these terms must first be
  defined and distinguished by their proper differences.


  [ ] Evidently the letter addressed to Pope Symmachus by the Oriental
  bishops (_vide_ Mansi, _Concil_. viii.   ff.), in which they inquire
  concerning the safe middle way between the heresies of Eutyches and
  Nestorius. The date of the bishops' letter, and consequently, in all
  probability, of Boethius's tractate was  .

  [ ] Obviously his father-in-law Symmachus. _Vide_ p.  , _eius cuius
  soleo iudiclo_, etc.

  [ ] Cf. Hor. _Serm_. i.  .  ; ii.  .  .

  [ ] Cf. _infra, de Cons._ i. pr.   (p.  ) _oportet uulnus detegas.

  [ ] _Vide supra_, p.  , and _De Trin._ p.  .




I.

Natura igitur aut de solis corporibus dici potest aut de solis substantiis,
id est corporeis atque incorporeis, aut de omnibus rebus quae quocumque
modo esse dicuntur. Cum igitur tribus modis natura dici possit, tribus
modis sine dubio definienda est. Nam si de omnibus rebus naturam dici
placet, talis definitio dabitur quae res omnes quae sunt possit includere.
Erit ergo huiusmodi: "natura est earum rerum quae, cum sint, quoquo modo
intellectu capi possunt." In hac igitur definitione et accidentia et
substantiae definiuntur; haec enim omnia intellectu capi possunt. Additum
uero est "quoquo modo," quoniam deus et materia integro perfectoque
intellectu intellegi non possunt, sed aliquo tamen modo ceterarum rerum
priuatione capiuntur. Idcirco uero adiunximus "quae cum sint," quoniam
etiam ipsum nihil significat aliquid sed non naturam. Neque enim quod sit
aliquid sed potius non esse significat; omnis uero natura est. Et si de
omnibus quidem rebus naturam dici placet, haec sit naturae definitio quam
superius proposuimus. Sin uero de solis substantiis natura dicitur, quoniam
substantiae omnes aut corporeae sunt aut incorporeae, dabimus definitionem
naturae substantias significanti huiusmodi: "natura est uel quod facere uel
quod pati possit." "Pati" quidem ac "facere," ut omnia corporea atque
corporeorum anima; haec enim in corpore et a corpore et facit et patitur.
"Facere" uero tantum ut deus ceteraque diuina. Habes igitur definitionem
eius quoque significationis naturae quae tantum substantiis applicatur. Qua
in re substantiae quoque est reddita definitio. Nam si nomen naturae
substantiam monstrat, cum naturam descripsimus substantiae quoque est
assignata descriptio. Quod si naturae nomen relictis incorporeis
substantiis ad corporales usque contrahitur, ut corporeae tantum
substantiae naturam habere uideantur, sicut Aristoteles ceterique et
eiusmodi et multimodae philosophiae sectatores putant, definiemus eam, ut
hi etiam qui naturam non nisi in corporibus esse posuerunt. Est autem eius
definitio hoc modo: "natura est motus principium per se non per accidens."
Quod "motus principium" dixi hoc est, quoniam corpus omne habet proprium
motum, ut ignis sursum, terra deorsum. Item quod "per se principium motus"
naturam esse proposui et non "per accidens," tale est, quoniam lectum
quoque ligneum deorsum ferri necesse est, sed non deorsum per accidens
fertur. Idcirco enim quia lignum est, quod est terra, pondere et grauitate
deducitur. Non enim quia lectus est, deorsum cadit, sed quia terra est, id
est quia terrae contigit, ut lectus esset; unde fit ut lignum naturaliter
esse dicamus, lectum uero artificialiter. Est etiam alia significatio
naturae per quam dicimus diuersam esse naturam auri atque argenti in hoc
proprietatem rerum monstrare cupientes, quae significatio naturae
definietur hoc modo: "natura est unam quamque rem informans specifica
differentia." Cum igitur tot modis uel dicatur uel definiatur natura, tam
catholici quam Nestorius secundum ultimam definitionem duas in Christo
naturas esse constituunt; neque enim easdem in deum atque hominem
differentias conuenire.




  I.

  Nature, then, may be affirmed either of bodies alone or of substances
  alone, that is, of corporeals or incorporeals, or of everything that is
  in any way capable of affirmation. Since, then, nature can be affirmed
  in three ways, it must obviously be defined in three ways. For if you
  choose to affirm nature of the totality of things, the definition will
  be of such a kind as to include all things that are. It will accordingly
  be something of this kind: "Nature belongs to those things which, since
  they exist, can in some measure be apprehended by the mind." This
  definition, then, includes both accidents and substances, for they all
  can be apprehended by the mind. But I add "in some measure" because God
  and matter cannot be apprehended by mind, be it never so whole and
  perfect, but still they are apprehended in a measure through the removal
  of accidents. The reason for adding the words, "since they exist," is
  that the mere word "nothing" denotes something, though it does not
  denote nature. For it denotes, indeed, not that anything is, but rather
  non-existence; but every nature exists. And if we choose to affirm
  "nature" of the totality of things, the definition will be as we have
  given it above.

  But if "nature" is affirmed of substances alone, we shall, since all
  substances are either corporeal or incorporeal, give to nature denoting
  substances a definition of the following kind: "Nature is either that
  which can act or that which can be acted upon." Now the power to act and
  to suffer belongs to all corporeals and the soul of corporeals; for it
  both acts in the body and suffers by the body. But only to act belongs
  to God and other divine substances.

  Here, then, you have a further definition of what nature is as applied
  to substances alone. This definition comprises also the definition of
  substance. For if the word nature signifies substance, when once we have
  defined nature we have also settled the definition of substance. But if
  we neglect incorporeal substances and confine the name nature to
  corporeal substances so that they alone appear to possess the nature of
  substance--which is the view of Aristotle and the adherents both of his
  and various other schools--we shall define nature as those do who have
  only allowed the word to be applied to bodies. Now, in accordance with
  this view, the definition is as follows: "Nature is the principle of
  movement properly inherent in and not accidentally attached to bodies."
  I say "principle of movement" because every body has its proper
  movement, fire moving upwards, the earth moving downwards. And what I
  mean by "movement properly inherent and not accidentally attached" is
  seen by the example of a wooden bed which is necessarily borne downward
  and is not carried downward by accident. For it is drawn downward by
  weight and heaviness because it is of wood, i.e. an earthly material.
  For it falls down not because it is a bed, but because it is earth, that
  is, because it is an accident of earth that it is a bed; hence we call
  it wood in virtue of its nature, but bed in virtue of the art that
  shaped it.

  Nature has, further, another meaning according to which we speak of the
  different nature of gold and silver, wishing thereby to point the
  special property of things; this meaning of nature will be defined as
  follows: "Nature is the specific difference that gives form to
  anything." Thus, although nature is described or defined in all these
  different ways, both Catholics and Nestorians firmly hold that there are
  in Christ two natures of the kind laid down in our last definition, for
  the same specific differences cannot apply to God and man.




II.

Sed de persona maxime dubitari potest, quaenam ei definitio possit aptari.
Si enim omnis habet natura personam, indissolubilis nodus est, quaenam
inter naturam personamque possit esse discretio; aut si non aequatur
persona naturae, sed infra terminum spatiumque naturae persona subsistit,
difficile dictu est ad quas usque naturas persona perueniat, id est quas
naturas conueniat habere personam, quas a personae uocabulo segregari. Nam
illud quidem manifestum est personae subiectam esse naturam nec praeter
naturam personam posse praedicari. Vestiganda sunt igitur haec
inquirentibus hoc modo.

Quoniam praeter naturam non potest esse persona quoniamque naturae aliae
sunt substantiae, aliae accidentes et uidemus personam in accidentibus non
posse constitui (quis enim dicat ullam albedinis uel nigredinis uel
magnitudinis esse personam?), relinquitur ergo ut personam in substantiis
dici conueniat. Sed substantiarum aliae sunt corporeae, aliae incorporeae.
Corporearum uero aliae sunt uiuentes, aliae minime; uiuentium aliae sunt
sensibiles, aliae minime; sensibilium aliae rationales, aliae inrationales.
Item incorporearum aliae sunt rationales, aliae minime, ut pecudum uitae;
rationalium uero alia est inmutabilis atque inpassibilis per naturam ut
deus, alia per creationem mutabilis atque passibilis, nisi inpassibilis
gratia substantiae ad inpassibilitatis firmitudinem permutetur ut angelorum
atque animae. Ex quibus omnibus neque in non uiuentibus corporibus personam
posse dici manifestum est (nullus enim lapidis ullam dicit esse personam),
neque rursus eorum uiuentium quae sensu carent (neque enim ulla persona est
arboris), nec uero eius quae intellectu ac ratione deseritur (nulla est
enim persona equi uel bouis ceterorumque animalium quae muta ac sine
ratione uitam solis sensibus degunt), at hominis dicimus esse personam,
dicimus dei, dicimus angeli. Rursus substantiarum aliae sunt uniuersales,
aliae particulares. Vniuersales sunt quae de singulis praedicantur ut homo,
animal, lapis, lignum ceteraque huiusmodi quae uel genera uel species sunt;
nam et homo de singulis hominibus et animal de singulis animalibus lapisque
ac lignum de singulis lapidibus ac lignis dicuntur. Particularia uero sunt
quae de aliis minime praedicantur ut Cicero, Plato, lapis hic unde haec
Achillis statua facta est, lignum hoc unde haec mensa composita est. Sed in
his omnibus nusquam in uniuersalibus persona dici potest, sed in
singularibus tantum atque in indiuiduis; animalis enim uel generalis
hominis nulla persona est, sed uel Ciceronis uel Platonis uel singulorum
indiuiduorum personae singulae nuncupantur.




  II.

  But the proper definition of Person is a matter of very great
  perplexity. For if every nature has person, the difference between
  nature and person is a hard knot to unravel; or if person is not taken
  as the equivalent of nature but is a term of less scope and range, it is
  difficult to say to what natures it may be extended, that is, to what
  natures the term person may be applied and what natures are dissociate
  from it. For one thing is clear, namely that nature is a substrate of
  Person, and that Person cannot be predicated apart from nature.

  We must, therefore, conduct our inquiry into these points as follows.

  Since Person cannot exist apart from a nature and since natures are
  either substances or accidents and we see that a person cannot come into
  being among accidents (for who can say there is any person of white or
  black or size?), it therefore remains that Person is properly applied to
  substances. But of substances, some are corporeal and others
  incorporeal. And of corporeals, some are living and others the reverse;
  of living substances, some are sensitive and others insensitive; of
  sensitive substances, some are rational and others irrational.[ ]
  Similarly of incorporeal substances, some are rational, others the
  reverse (for instance the animating spirits of beasts); but of rational
  substances there is one which is immutable and impassible by nature,
  namely God, another which in virtue of its creation is mutable and
  passible except in that case where the Grace of the impassible substance
  has transformed it to the unshaken impassibility which belongs to angels
  and to the soul.

  Now from all the definitions we have given it is clear that Person
  cannot be affirmed of bodies which have no life (for no one ever said
  that a stone had a person), nor yet of living things which lack sense
  (for neither is there any person of a tree), nor finally of that which
  is bereft of mind and reason (for there is no person of a horse or ox or
  any other of the animals which dumb and unreasoning live a life of sense
  alone), but we say there is a person of a man, of God, of an angel.
  Again, some substances are universal, others are particular. Universal
  terms are those which are predicated of individuals, as man, animal,
  stone, stock and other things of this kind which are either genera or
  species; for the term man is applied to individual men just as animal is
  to individual animals, and stone and stock to individual stones and
  stocks. But particulars are terms which are never predicated of other
  things, as Cicero, Plato, this stone from which this statue of Achilles
  was hewn, this piece of wood out of which this table was made. But in
  all these things person cannot in any case be applied to universals, but
  only to particulars and individuals; for there is no person of a man if
  animal or general; only the single persons of Cicero, Plato, or other
  single individuals are termed persons.

  [ ] For a similar example of the method of _diuisio_ cf. Cic. _De Off._
  ii.  .  . Cf. also _Isag. Porph. edit. prima_, i.   (ed. Brandt, p.
   ).




III.

Quocirca si persona in solis substantiis est atque in his rationabilibus
substantiaque omnis natura est nec in uniuersalibus sed in indiuiduis
constat, reperta personae est definitio: "naturae rationabilis indiuidua
substantia." Sed nos hac definitione eam quam Graeci [Greek: hupostasin]
dicunt terminauimus. Nomen enim personae uidetur aliunde traductum, ex his
scilicet personis quae in comoediis tragoediisque eos quorum interest
homines repraesentabant. Persona uero dicta est a personando circumflexa
paenultima. Quod si acuatur antepaenultima, apertissime a sono dicta
uidebitur; idcirco autem a sono, quia concauitate ipsa maior necesse est
uoluatur sonus. Graeci quoque has personas [Greek: prosopa] uocant ab eo
quod ponantur in facie atque ante oculos obtegant uultum: [Greek: para tou
pros tous opas tithesthai.] Sed quoniam personis inductis histriones
indiuiduos homines quorum intererat in tragoedia uel in comoedia ut dictum
est repraesentabant, id est Hecubam uel Medeam uel Simonem uel Chremetem,
idcirco ceteros quoque homines, quorum certa pro sui forma esset agnitio,
et Latini personam et Graeci [Greek: prosopa] nuncupauerunt. Longe uero
illi signatius naturae rationabilis indiuiduam subsistentiam [Greek:
hupostaseos] nomine uocauerunt, nos uero per inopiam significantium uocum
translaticiam retinuimus nuncupationem, eam quam illi [Greek: hupostasin]
dicunt personam uocantes; sed peritior Graecia sermonum [Greek: hupostasin]
uocat indiuiduam subsistentiam. Atque, uti Graeca utar oratione in rebus
quae a Graecis agitata Latina interpretatione translata sunt: [Greek: hai
ousiai en men tois katholou einai dunantai. en de tois atomois kai kata
meros monois huphistantai], id est: essentiae in uniuersalibus quidem esse
possunt, in solis uero indiuiduis et particularibus substant. Intellectus
enim uniuersalium rerum ex particularibus sumptus est. Quocirca cum ipsae
subsistentiae in uniuersalibus quidem sint, in particularibus uero capiant
substantiam, iure subsistentias particulariter substantes [Greek:
hupostaseis] appellauerunt. Neque enim pensius subtiliusque intuenti idem
uidebitur esse subsistentia quod substantia.

Nam quod Graeci [Greek: ousiosin] uel [Greek: ousiosthai] dicunt, id nos
subsistentiam uel subsistere appellamus; quod uero illi [Greek: hupostasin]
uel [Greek: huphistasthai], id nos substantiam uel substare interpretamur.
Subsistit enim quod ipsum accidentibus, ut possit esse, non indiget.
Substat autem id quod aliis accidentibus subiectum quoddam, ut esse
ualeant, subministrat; sub illis enim stat, dum subiectum est accidentibus.
Itaque genera uel species subsistunt tantum; neque enim accidentia
generibus speciebus*ue contingunt. Indiuidua uero non modo subsistunt uerum
etiam substant, nam neque ipsa indigent accidentibus ut sint; informata
enim sunt iam propriis et specificis differentiis et accidentibus ut esse
possint ministrant, dum sunt scilicet subiecta. Quocirca [Greek: einai]
atque [Greek: ousiosthai] esse atque subsistere, [Greek: huphistasthai]
uero substare intellegitur. Neque enim uerborum inops Graecia est, ut
Marcus Tullius alludit, sed essentiam, subsistentiam, substantiam, personam
totidem nominibus reddit, essentiam quidem [Greek: ousian], subsistentiam
uero [Greek: ousiosin], substantiam [Greek: hupostasin], personam [Greek:
prosopon] appellans. Ideo autem [Greek: hupostaseis] Graeci indiuiduas
substantias uocauerunt, quoniam ceteris subsunt et quibusdam quasi
accidentibus subpositae subiectaeque sunt; atque idcirco nos quoque eas
substantias nuncupamus quasi subpositas, quas illi[ ] [Greek:
hupostaseis], cumque etiam [Greek: prosopa] nuncupent easdem substantias,
possumus nos quoque nuncupare personas. Idem est igitur [Greek: ousian]
esse quod essentiam, idem [Greek: ousiosin] quod subsistentiam, idem
[Greek: hupostasin] quod substantiam, idem [Greek: prosopon] quod personam.
Quare autem de inrationabilibus animalibus Graecus [Greek: hupostasin] non
dicat, sicut nos de eisdem nomen substantiae praedicamus, haec ratio est,
quoniam nomen hoc melioribus applicatum est, ut aliqua id quod est
excellentius, tametsi non descriptione naturae secundum id quod [Greek:
huphistasthai] atque substare est, at certe [Greek: hupostaseos] uel
substantiae uocabulis discerneretur.

Est igitur et hominis quidem essentia, id est [Greek: ousia], et
subsistentia, id est [Greek: ousiosis], et [Greek: hupostasis], id est
substantia, et [Greek: prosopon], id est persona; [Greek: ousia], quidem
atque essentia quoniam est, [Greek: ousiosis] uero atque subsistentia
quoniam in nullo subiecto est, [Greek: hupostasis] uero atque substantia,
quoniam subest ceteris quae subsistentiae non sunt, id est [Greek:
ousioseis]; est [Greek: prosopon] atque persona, quoniam est rationabile
indiuiduum. Deus quoque et [Greek: ousia] est et essentia, est enim et
maxime ipse est a quo omnium esse proficiscitur. Est [Greek: ousiosis], id
est subsistentia (subsistit enim nullo indigens), et [Greek:
huphistasthai]; substat enim. Vnde etiam dicimus unam esse [Greek: ousian]
uel [Greek: ousiosin], id est essentiam uel subsistentiam deitatis, sed
tres [Greek: hupostaseis], id est tres substantias. Et quidem secundum hunc
modum dixere unam trinitatis essentiam, tres substantias tresque personas.
Nisi enim tres in deo substantias ecclesiasticus loquendi usus excluderet,
uideretur idcirco de deo dici substantia, non quod ipse ceteris rebus quasi
subiectum supponeretur, sed quod idem omnibus uti praeesset ita etiam quasi
principium subesset rebus, dum eis omnibus [Greek: ousiosthai] uel
subsistere subministrat.


[ ] quas illi _Vallinus_; quasi _uel_ quas _codd. meliores_.




  III.

  Wherefore if Person belongs to substances alone, and these rational, and
  if every nature is a substance, existing not in universals but in
  individuals, we have found the definition of Person, viz.: "The
  individual substance of a rational nature."[ ] Now by this definition
  we Latins have described what the Greeks call [Greek: hupostasis]. For
  the word person seems to be borrowed from a different source, namely
  from the masks which in comedies and tragedies used to signify the
  different subjects of representation. Now _persona_ "mask" is
  derived from _personare_, with a circumflex on the penultimate. But
  if the accent is put on the antepenultimate[ ] the word will clearly be
  seen to come from _sonus_ "sound," and for this reason, that the
  hollow mask necessarily produces a larger sound. The Greeks, too, call
  these masks [Greek: prosopa] from the fact that they are placed over the
  face and conceal the countenance from the spectator: [Greek: para tou
  pros tous opas tithesthai]. But since, as we have said, it was by the
  masks they put on that actors played the different characters
  represented in a tragedy or comedy--Hecuba or Medea or Simon or
  Chremes,--so also all other men who could be recognized by their several
  characteristics were designated by the Latins with the term
  _persona_ and by the Greeks with [Greek: prosopa]. But the Greeks
  far more clearly gave to the individual subsistence of a rational nature
  the name [Greek: hupostasis] while we through want of appropriate words
  have kept a borrowed term, calling that _persona_ which they call
  [Greek: hupostasis]; but Greece with its richer vocabulary gives the
  name [Greek: hupostasis] to the individual subsistence. And, if I may
  use Greek in dealing with matters which were first mooted by Greeks
  before they came to be interpreted in Latin: [Greek: hai ousiai en men
  tois katholou einai dunantai. en de tois atomois kai kata meros monois
  huphistantai], that is: essences indeed can have potential existence in
  universals, but they have particular substantial existence in
  particulars alone. For it is from particulars that all our comprehension
  of universals is taken. Wherefore since subsistences are present in
  universals but acquire substance in particulars they rightly gave the
  name [Greek: hupostasis] to subsistences which acquired substance
  through the medium of particulars. For to no one using his eyes with any
  care or penetration will subsistence and substance appear identical.

  For our equivalents of the Greek terms [Greek: ousiosis ousiosthai] are
  respectively _subsistentia_ and _subsistere_, while their
  [Greek: hupostasis huphistasthai] are represented by our
  _substantia_ and _substare_. For a thing has subsistence when
  it does not require accidents in order to be, but that thing has
  substance which supplies to other things, accidents to wit, a substrate
  enabling them to be; for it "substands" those things so long as it is
  subjected to accidents. Thus genera and species have only subsistence,
  for accidents do not attach to genera and species. But particulars have
  not only subsistence but substance, for they, no more than generals,
  depend on accidents for their Being; for they are already provided with
  their proper and specific differences and they enable accidents to be by
  supplying them with a substrate. Wherefore _esse_ and
  _subsistere_ represent [Greek: einai] and [Greek: ousiosthai],
  while _substare_ represents [Greek: huphistasthai]. For Greece is
  not, as Marcus Tullius[ ] playfully says, short of words, but provides
  exact equivalents for _essentia, subsistentia, substantia_ and
  _persona_--[Greek: ousia] for _essentia_, [Greek: ousiosis]
  for _subsistentia_, [Greek: hupostasis] for _substantia_,
  [Greek: prosopon] for _persona_. But the Greeks called individual
  substances [Greek: hupostaseis] because they underlie the rest and offer
  support and substrate to what are called accidents; and we in our term
  call them substances as being substrate--[Greek: hupostaseis], and since
  they also term the same substances [Greek: prosopa], we too may call
  them persons. So [Greek: ousia] is identical with essence, [Greek:
  ousiosis] with subsistence, [Greek: hupostasis] with substance, [Greek:
  prosopon] with person. But the reason why the Greek does not use [Greek:
  hupostasis] of irrational animals while we apply the term substance to
  them is this: This term was applied to things of higher value, in order
  that what is more excellent might be distinguished, if not by a
  definition of nature answering to the literal meaning of [Greek:
  huphistasthai]=_substare_, at any rate by the words [Greek:
  hupostasis]=_substantia_.

  To begin with, then, man is essence, i.e. [Greek: ousia], subsistence,
  i.e. [Greek: ousiosis, hupostasis], i.e. substance, [Greek: prosopon],
  i.e. person: [Greek: ousia] or _essentia_ because he is, [Greek:
  ousiosis], or subsistence because he is not accidental to any subject,
  [Greek: hupostusis] or substance because he is subject to all the things
  which are not subsistences or [Greek: ousioseis], while he is [Greek:
  prosopon] or person because he is a rational individual. Next, God is
  [Greek: ousia], or essence, for He is and is especially that from which
  proceeds the Being of all things. To Him belong [Greek: ousiosis], i.e.
  subsistence, for He subsists in absolute independence, and [Greek:
  huphistasthai], for He is substantial Being. Whence we go on to say that
  there is one [Greek: ousia] or [Greek: ousiosis], i.e. one essence or
  subsistence of the Godhead, but three [Greek: hupostaseis] or
  substances. And indeed, following this use, men have spoken of One
  essence, three substances and three persons of the Godhead. For did not
  the language of the Church forbid us to say three substances in speaking
  of God,[ ] substance might seem a right term to apply to Him, not
  because He underlies all other things like a substrate, but because,
  just as He excels above all things, so He is the foundation and support
  of things, supplying them all with [Greek: ousiosthai] or subsistence.


  [ ] Boethius's definition of _persona_ was adopted by St. Thomas (S. i.
   .  ), was regarded as classical by the Schoolmen, and has the approval
  of modern theologians. Cf. Dorner, _Doctrine of Christ_, iii. p.  .

  [ ] Implying a short penultimate.

  [ ] _Tusc._ ii.  .  .

  [ ] For a similar submission of his own opinion to the usage of the
  Church cf. the end of _Tr._ i. and of _Tr._ ii.




IV.

Sed haec omnia idcirco sint dicta, ut differentiam naturae atque personae
id est [Greek: ousias] atque [Greek: hupostaseos] monstraremus. Quo uero
nomine unumquodque oporteat appellari, ecclesiasticae sit locutionis
arbitrium. Hoc interim constet quod inter naturam personamque differre
praediximus, quoniam natura est cuiuslibet substantiae specificata
proprietas, persona uero rationabilis naturae indiuidua substantia. Hanc in
Christo Nestorius duplicem esse constituit eo scilicet traductus errore,
quod putauerit in omnibus naturis dici posse personam. Hoc enim praesumpto,
quoniam in Christo duplicem naturam esse censebat, duplicem quoque personam
esse confessus est. Qua in re eum falsum esse cum definitio superius dicta
conuincat, tum haec argumentatio euidenter eius declarabit errorem. Si enim
non est Christi una persona duasque naturas esse manifestum est, hominis
scilicet atque dei (nec tam erit insipiens quisquam, utqui utramque earum a
ratione seiungat), sequitur ut duae uideantur esse personae; est enim
persona ut dictum est naturae rationabilis indiuidua substantia.

Quae est igitur facta hominis deique coniunctio? Num ita quasi cum duo
corpora sibimet apponuntur, ut tantum locis iuncta sint et nihil in alterum
ex alterius qualitate perueniat? Quem coniunctionis Graeci modum [Greek:
kata parathesin] uocant. Sed si ita humanitas diuinitati coniuncta est,
nihil horum ex utrisque confectum est ac per hoc nihil est Christus. Nomen
quippe ipsum unum quiddam significat singularitate uocabuli. At si duabus
personis manentibus ea coniunctio qualem superius diximus facta est
naturarum, unum ex duobus effici nihil potuit; omnino enim ex duabus
personis nihil umquam fieri potest. Nihil igitur unum secundum Nestorium
Christus est ac per hoc omnino nihil. Quod enim non est unum, nec esse
omnino potest; esse enim atque unum conuertitur et quodcumque unum est est.
Etiam ea quae ex pluribus coniunguntur ut aceruus, chorus, unum tamen sunt.
Sed esse Christum manifeste ac ueraciter confitemur; unum igitur esse
dicimus Christum. Quod si ita est, unam quoque Christi sine dubitatione
personam esse necesse est. Nam si duae personae essent, unus esse non
posset; duos uero esse dicere Christos nihil est aliud nisi praecipitatae
mentis insania. Cur enim omnino duos audeat Christos uocare, unum hominem
alium deum? Vel cur eum qui deus est Christum uocat, si eum quoque qui homo
est Christum est appellaturus, cum nihil simile, nihil habeant ex
copulatione coniunctum? Cur simili nomine diuersissimis abutatur naturis,
cum, si Christum definire cogitur, utrisque ut ipse dicit Christis non
possit unam definitionis adhibere substantiam? Si enim dei atque hominis
diuersa substantia est unumque in utrisque Christi nomen nec diuersarum
coniunctio substantiarum unam creditur fecisse personam, aequiuocum nomen
est Christi et nulla potest definitione concludi. Quibus autem umquam
scripturis nomen Christi geminatur? Quid uero noui per aduentum saluatoris
effectum est? Nam catholicis et fidei ueritas et raritas miraculi constat.
Quam enim magnum est quamque nouum, quam quod semel nec ullo alio saeculo
possit euenire, ut eius qui solus est deus natura cum humana quae ab eo
erat diuersissima conueniret atque ita ex distantibus naturis una fieret
copulatione persona! Secundum Nestorii uero sententiam quid contingit noui?
"Seruant," inquit, "proprias humanitas diuinitasque personas." Quando enim
non fuit diuinitatis propria humanitatisque persona? Quando uero non erit?
Vel quid amplius in Iesu generatione contingit quam in cuiuslibet alterius,
si discretis utrisque personis discretae etiam fuere naturae? Ita enim
personis manentibus illic nulla naturarum potuit esse coniunctio, ut in
quolibet homine, cuius cum propria persona subsistat, nulla est ei
excellentissimae substantiae coniuncta diuinitas. Sed fortasse Iesum, id
est personam hominis, idcirco Christum uocet, quoniam per eam mira quaedam
sit operata diuinitas. Esto. Deum uero ipsum Christi appellatione cur
uocet? Cur uero non elementa quoque ipsa simili audeat appellare uocabulo
per quae deus mira quaedam cotidianis motibus operatur? An quia
inrationabiles substantiae non possunt habere personam qua[ ] Christi
uocabulum excipere possint[ ]? Nonne in sanctis hominibus ac pietate
conspicuis apertus diuinitatis actus agnoscitur? Nihil enim intererit, cur
non sanctos quoque uiros eadem appellatione dignetur, si in adsumptione
humanitatis non est una ex coniunctione persona. Sed dicat forsitan, "Illos
quoque Christos uocari fateor, sed ad imaginem ueri Christi." Quod si nulla
ex homine atque deo una persona coniuncta est, omnes ita ueros Christos
arbitrabimur ut hunc qui ex uirgine genitus creditur. Nulla quippe in hoc
adunata persona est ex dei atque hominis copulatione sicut nec in eis, qui
dei spiritu de uenturo Christo praedicebant, propter quod etiam ipsi quoque
appellati sunt Christi. Iam uero sequitur, ut personis manentibus nullo
modo a diuinitate humanitas credatur adsumpta. Omnino enim disiuncta sunt
quae aeque personis naturisque separantur, prorsus inquam disiuncta sunt
nec magis inter se homines bouesque disiuncti quam diuinitas in Christo
humanitasque discreta est, si mansere personae. Homines quippe ac boues una
animalis communitate iunguntur; est enim illis secundum genus communis
substantia eademque in uniuersalitatis collectione natura. Deo uero atque
homini quid non erit diuersa ratione disiunctum, si sub diuersitate naturae
personarum quoque credatur mansisse discretio? Non est igitur saluatum
genus humanum, nulla in nos salus Christi generatione processit, tot
prophetarum scripturae populum inlusere credentem, omnis ueteris testamenti
spernatur auctoritas per quam salus mundo Christi generatione promittitur.
Non autem prouenisse manifestum est, si eadem in persona est quae in natura
diuersitas. Eundem quippe saluum fecit quem creditur adsumpsisse; nulla
uero intellegi adsumptio potest, si manet aeque naturae personaeque
discretio. Igitur qui adsumi manente persona non potuit, iure non uidebitur
per Christi generationem potuisse saluari. Non est igitur per generationem
Christi hominum saluata natura,--quod credi nefas est.

Sed quamquam permulta sint quae hunc sensum inpugnare ualeant atque
perfringere, de argumentorum copia tamen haec interim libasse sufficiat.


[ ] quae _codd._

[ ] possit _Vallinus_.




  IV.

  You must consider that all I have said so far has been for the purpose
  of marking the difference between Nature and Person, that is, [Greek:
  ousia] and [Greek: hupostasis]. The exact terms which should be applied
  in each case must be left to the decision of ecclesiastical usage. For
  the time being let that distinction between Nature and Person hold which
  I have affirmed, viz. that Nature is the specific property of any
  substance, and Person the individual substance of a rational nature.
  Nestorius affirmed that in Christ Person was twofold, being led astray
  by the false notion that Person may be applied to every nature. For on
  this assumption, understanding that there were in Christ two natures, he
  declared that there were likewise two persons. And although the
  definition which we have already given is enough to prove Nestorius
  wrong, his error shall be further declared by the following argument. If
  the Person of Christ is not single, and if it is clear that there are in
  Him two natures, to wit, divine and human (and no one will be so foolish
  as to fail to include either in the definition), it follows that there
  must apparently be two persons; for Person, as has been said, is the
  individual substance of a rational nature.

  What kind of union, then, between God and man has been effected? Is it
  as when two bodies are laid the one against the other, so that they are
  only joined locally, and no touch of the quality of the one reaches the
  other--the kind of union which the Greeks term [Greek: kata parathesin]
  "by juxtaposition"? But if humanity has been united to divinity in this
  way no one thing has been formed out of the two, and hence Christ is
  nothing. The very name of Christ, indeed, denotes by its singular number
  a unity. But if the two persons continued and such a union of natures as
  we have above described took place, there could be no unity formed from
  two things, for nothing could ever possibly be formed out of two
  persons. Therefore Christ is, according to Nestorius, in no respect one,
  and therefore He is absolutely nothing. For what is not one cannot exist
  either; because Being and unity are convertible terms, and whatever is
  one is. Even things which are made up of many items, such as a heap or
  chorus, are nevertheless a unity. Now we openly and honestly confess
  that Christ is; therefore we say that Christ is a Unity. And if this is
  so, then without controversy the Person of Christ is one also. For if
  the Persons were two He could not be one; but to say that there are two
  Christs is nothing else than the madness of a distraught brain. Could
  Nestorius, I ask, dare to call the one man and the one God in Christ two
  Christs? Or why does he call Him Christ who is God, if he is also going
  to call Him Christ who is man, when his combination gives the two no
  common factor, no coherence? Why does he wrongly use the same name for
  two utterly different natures, when, if he is compelled to define
  Christ, he cannot, as he himself admits, apply the substance of one
  definition to both his Christs? For if the substance of God is different
  from that of man, and the one name of Christ applies to both, and the
  combination of different substances is not believed to have formed one
  Person, the name of Christ is equivocal[ ] and cannot be comprised in
  one definition. But in what Scriptures is the name of Christ ever made
  double? Or what new thing has been wrought by the coming of the Saviour?
  For the truth of the faith and the unwontedness of the miracle alike
  remain, for Catholics, unshaken. For how great and unprecedented a thing
  it is--unique and incapable of repetition in any other age--that the
  nature of Him who is God alone should come together with human nature
  which was entirely different from God to form from different natures by
  conjunction a single Person! But now, if we follow Nestorius, what
  happens that is new? "Humanity and divinity," quoth he, "keep their
  proper Persons." Well, when had not divinity and humanity each its
  proper Person? And when, we answer, will this not be so? Or wherein is
  the birth of Jesus more significant than that of any other child, if,
  the two Persons remaining distinct, the natures also were distinct? For
  while the Persons remained so there could no more be a union of natures
  in Christ than there could be in any other man with whose substance, be
  it never so perfect, no divinity was ever united because of the
  subsistence of his proper person. But for the sake of argument let him
  call Jesus, i.e. the human person, Christ, because through that person
  God wrought certain wonders. Agreed. But why should he call God Himself
  by the name of Christ? Why should he not go on to call the very elements
  by that name? For through them in their daily movements God works
  certain wonders. Is it because irrational substances cannot possess a
  Person enabling them to receive the name of Christ? Is not the operation
  of God seen plainly in men of holy life and notable piety? There will
  surely be no reason not to call the saints also by that name, if Christ
  taking humanity on Him is not one Person through conjunction. But
  perhaps he will say, "I allow that such men are called Christs, but it
  is because they are in the image of the true Christ." But if no one
  Person has been formed of the union of God and man, we shall consider
  all of them just as true Christs as Him who, we believe, was born of a
  Virgin. For no Person has been made one by the union of God and man
  either in Him or in them who by the Spirit of God foretold the coming
  Christ, for which cause they too were called Christs. So now it follows
  that so long as the Persons remain, we cannot in any wise believe that
  humanity has been assumed by divinity. For things which differ alike in
  persons and natures are certainly separate, nay absolutely separate; man
  and oxen are not further separate than are divinity and humanity in
  Christ, if the Persons have remained. Men indeed and oxen are united in
  one animal nature, for by genus they have a common substance and the
  same nature in the collection which forms the universal.[ ] But God and
  man will be at all points fundamentally different if we are to believe
  that distinction of Persons continues under difference of nature. Then
  the human race has not been saved, the birth of Christ has brought us no
  salvation, the writings of all the prophets have but beguiled the people
  that believed in them, contempt is poured upon the authority of the
  whole Old Testament which promised to the world salvation by the birth
  of Christ. It is plain that salvation has not been brought us, if there
  is the same difference in Person that there is in Nature. No doubt He
  saved that humanity which we believe He assumed; but no assumption can
  be conceived, if the separation abides alike of Nature and of Person.
  Hence that human nature which could not be assumed as long as the Person
  continued, will certainly and rightly appear incapable of salvation by
  the birth of Christ. Wherefore man's nature has not been saved by the
  birth of Christ--an impious conclusion.[ ]

  But although there are many weapons strong enough to wound and demolish
  the Nestorian view, let us for the moment be content with this small
  selection from the store of arguments available.

  [ ] Cf. the discussion of _aequiuoca_=[Greek: homonumos] in _Isag.
  Porph. Vide_ Brandt's Index.

  [ ] Vniuersalitas=[Greek: to katholou].

  [ ] For a similar _reductio ad absurdum_ ending in _quod nefas est_ see
  _Tr._ iii. (_supra_, p.  ) and _Cons._ v.   (_infra_, p.  ).




V.

Transeundum quippe est ad Eutychen qui cum a ueterum orbitis esset
euagatus, in contrarium cucurrit errorem asserens tantum abesse, ut in
Christo gemina persona credatur, ut ne naturam quidem in eo duplicem
oporteat confiteri; ita quippe esse adsumptum hominem, ut ea sit adunatio
facta cum deo, ut natura humana non manserit. Huius error ex eodem quo
Nestorii fonte prolabitur. Nam sicut Nestorius arbitratur non posse esse
naturam duplicem quin persona fieret duplex, atque ideo, cum in Christo
naturam duplicem confiteretur, duplicem credidit esse personam, ita quoque
Eutyches non putauit naturam duplicem esse sine duplicatione personae et
cum non confiteretur duplicem esse personam, arbitratus est consequens, ut
una uideretur esse natura. Itaque Nestorius recte tenens duplicem in
Christo esse naturam sacrilege confitetur duas esse personas; Eutyches uero
recte credens unam esse personam impie credit unam quoque esse naturam. Qui
conuictus euidentia rerum, quandoquidem manifestum est aliam naturam esse
hominis aliam dei, ait duas se confiteri in Christo naturas ante
adunationem, unam uero post adunationem. Quae sententia non aperte quod
uult eloquitur. Vt tamen eius dementiam perscrutemur, adunatio haec aut
tempore generationis facta est aut tempore resurrectionis. Sed si tempore
generationis facta est, uidetur putare et ante generationem fuisse humanam
carnem non a Maria sumptam sed aliquo modo alio praeparatam, Mariam uero
uirginem appositam ex qua caro nasceretur quae ab ea sumpta non esset,
illam uero carnem quae antea fuerit esse et diuisam atque a diuinitatis
substantia separatam; cum ex uirgine natus est, adunatum esse deo, ut una
uideretur facta esse natura. Vel si haec eius sententia non est, illa esse
poterit dicentis duas ante adunationem, unam post adunationem, si adunatio
generatione perfecta est, ut corpus quidem a Maria sumpserit, sed, antequam
sumeret, diuersam deitatis humanitatisque fuisse naturam; sumptam uero unam
factam atque in diuinitatis cessisse substantiam. Quod si hanc adunationem
non putat generatione sed resurrectione factam, rursus id duobus fieri
arbitrabitur modis; aut enim genito Christo et non adsumente de Maria
corpus aut adsumente ab eadem carnem, usque dum resurgeret quidem, duas
fuisse naturas, post resurrectionem unam factam. De quibus illud disiunctum
nascitur, quod interrogabimus hoc modo: natus ex Maria Christus aut ab ea
carnem humanam traxit aut minime. Si non confitetur ex ea traxisse, dicat
quo homine indutus aduenerit, utrumne eo qui deciderat praeuaricatione
peccati an alio? Si eo de cuius semine ductus est homo, quem uestita
diuinitas est? Nam si ex semine Abrahae atque Dauid et postremo Mariae non
fuit caro illa qua natus est, ostendat ex cuius hominis sit carne
deriuatus, quoniam post primum hominem caro omnis humana ex humana carne
deducitur. Sed si quem dixerit hominem a quo generatio sumpta sit
saluatoris praeter Mariam uirginem, et ipse errore confundetur et
adscribere mendacii notam summae diuinitati inlusus ipse uidebitur, quando
quod Abrahae atque Dauid promittitur in sanctis diuinationibus, ut ex eorum
semine toti mundo salus oriatur, aliis distribuit, cum praesertim, si
humana caro sumpta est, non ab alio sumi potuerit nisi unde etiam
procreabatur. Si igitur a Maria non est sumptum corpus humanum sed a
quolibet alio, per Mariam tamen est procreatum quod fuerat praeuaricatione
corruptum, superius dicto repellitur argumento. Quod si non eo homine
Christus indutus est qui pro peccati poena sustinuerat mortem, illud
eueniet ex nullius hominis semine talem potuisse nasci qui fuerit sine
originalis poena peccati. Ex nullo igitur talis sumpta est caro; unde fit
ut nouiter uideatur esse formata. Sed haec aut ita hominum uisa est oculis,
ut humanum putaretur corpus quod reuera non esset humanum, quippe quod
nulli originali subiaceret poenae, aut noua quaedam uera nec poenae peccati
subiacens originalis ad tempus hominis natura formata est? Si uerum hominis
corpus non fuit, aperte arguitur mentita diuinitas, quae ostenderet
hominibus corpus, quod cum uerum non esset, tum fallerentur ii[ ] qui
uerum esse arbitrarentur. At si noua ueraque non ex homine sumpta caro
formata est, quo tanta tragoedia generationis? Vbi ambitus passionis? Ego
quippe ne in homine quidem non stulte fieri puto quod inutiliter factum
est. Ad quam uero utilitatem facta probabitur tanta humilitas diuinitatis,
si homo qui periit generatione ac passione Christi saluatus non est,
quoniam negatur adsumptus? Rursus igitur sicut ab eodem Nestorii fonte
Eutychis error principium sumpsit, ita ad eundem finem relabitur, ut
secundum Eutychen quoque non sit saluatum genus humanum, quoniam non is qui
aeger esset et saluatione curaque egeret, adsumptus est. Traxisse autem
hanc sententiam uidetur, si tamen huius erroris fuit ut crederet non fuisse
corpus Christi uere ex homine sed extra atque adeo in caelo formatum,
quoniam cum eo in caelum creditur ascendisse. Quod exemplum continet tale:
"non ascendit in caelum, nisi qui de caelo descendit."


[ ] hii _uel_ hi _codd._




  V.

  I must now pass to Eutyches who, wandering from the path of primitive
  doctrine, has rushed into the opposite error[ ] and asserts that so far
  from our having to believe in a twofold Person in Christ, we must not
  even confess a double Nature; humanity, he maintains, was so assumed
  that the union with Godhead involved the disappearance of the human
  nature. His error springs from the same source as that of Nestorius. For
  just as Nestorius deems there could not be a double Nature unless the
  Person were doubled, and therefore, confessing the double Nature in
  Christ, has perforce believed the Person to be double, so also Eutyches
  deemed that the Nature was not double unless the Person was double, and
  since he did not confess a double Person, he thought it a necessary
  consequence that the Nature should be regarded as single. Thus
  Nestorius, rightly holding Christ's Nature to be double, sacrilegiously
  professes the Persons to be two; whereas Eutyches, rightly believing the
  Person to be single, impiously believes that the Nature also is single.
  And being confuted by the plain evidence of facts, since it is clear
  that the Nature of God is different from that of man, he declares his
  belief to be: two Natures in Christ before the union and only one after
  the union. Now this statement does not express clearly what he means.
  However, let us scrutinize his extravagance. It is plain that this union
  took place either at the moment of conception or at the moment of
  resurrection. But if it happened at the moment of conception, Eutyches
  seems to think that even before conception He had human flesh, not taken
  from Mary but prepared in some other way, while the Virgin Mary was
  brought in to give birth to flesh that was not taken from her; that this
  flesh, which already existed, was apart and separate from the substance
  of divinity, but that when He was born of the Virgin it was united to
  God, so that the Nature seemed to be made one. Or if this be not his
  opinion, since he says that there were two Natures before the union and
  one after, supposing the union to be established by conception, an
  alternative view may be that Christ indeed took a body from Mary but
  that before He took it the Natures of Godhead and manhood were
  different: but the Nature assumed became one with that of Godhead into
  which it passed. But if he thinks that this union was effected not by
  conception but by resurrection, we shall have to assume that this too
  happened in one of two ways; either Christ was conceived and did
  _not_ assume a body from Mary or He _did_ assume flesh from
  her, and there were (until indeed He rose) two Natures which became one
  after the Resurrection. From these alternatives a dilemma arises which
  we will examine as follows: Christ who was born of Mary either did or
  did not take human flesh from her. If Eutyches does not admit that He
  took it from her, then let him say what manhood He put on to come among
  us--that which had fallen through sinful disobedience or another? If it
  was the manhood of that man from whom all men descend, what manhood did
  divinity invest? For if that flesh in which He was born came not of the
  seed of Abraham and of David and finally of Mary, let Eutyches show from
  what man's flesh he descended, since, after the first man, all human
  flesh is derived from human flesh. But if he shall name any child of man
  beside Mary the Virgin as the cause of the conception of the Saviour, he
  will both be confounded by his own error, and, himself a dupe, will
  stand accused of stamping with falsehood the very Godhead for thus
  transferring to others the promise of the sacred oracles made to Abraham
  and David[ ] that of their seed salvation should arise for all the
  world, especially since if human flesh was taken it could not be taken
  from any other but Him of whom it was begotten. If, therefore, His human
  body was not taken from Mary but from any other, yet that was engendered
  through Mary which had been corrupted by disobedience, Eutyches is
  confuted by the argument already stated. But if Christ did not put on
  that manhood which had endured death in punishment for sin, it will
  result that of no man's seed could ever one have been born who should
  be, like Him, without punishment for original sin. Therefore flesh like
  His was taken from no man, whence it would appear to have been new-
  formed for the purpose. But did this flesh then either so appear to
  human eyes that the body was deemed human which was not really human,
  because it was not subject to any primal penalty, or was some new true
  human flesh formed as a makeshift, not subject to the penalty for
  original sin? If it was not a truly human body, the Godhead is plainly
  convicted of falsehood for displaying to men a body which was not real
  and thus deceived those who thought it real.  But if flesh had been
  formed new and real and not taken from man, to what purpose was the
  tremendous tragedy of the conception? Where the value of His long
  Passion? I cannot but consider foolish even a human action that is
  useless. And to what useful end shall we say this great humiliation of
  Divinity was wrought if ruined man has not been saved by the conception
  and the Passion of Christ--for they denied that he was taken into
  Godhead? Once more then, just as the error of Eutyches took its rise
  from the same source as that of Nestorius, so it hastens to the same
  goal inasmuch as according to Eutyches also the human race has not been
  saved,[ ] since man who was sick and needed health and salvation was
  not taken into Godhead. Yet this is the conclusion he seems to have
  drawn, if he erred so deeply as to believe that Christ's body was not
  taken really from man but from a source outside him and prepared for the
  purpose in heaven, for He is believed to have ascended with it up into
  heaven. Which is the meaning of the text: none hath ascended into heaven
  save Him who came down from heaven.


  [ ] The ecclesiastical _uia media_, with the relegation of opposing
  theories to the extremes, which meet in a common fount of falsity, owes
  something to Aristotle and to our author. _Vide infra_, p.  .

  [ ] The use of this kind of argument by Boethius allays any suspicion
  as to the genuineness of _Tr_. iv. which might be caused by the use of
  allegorical interpretation therein. Note also that in the _Consolatio_
  the framework is allegory, which is also freely applied in the details.

  [ ] Another _reductio ad absurdum_ or _ad impietatem_, cf. _supra_, p.
   , note b.




VI.

Sed satis de ea parte dictum uidetur, si corpus quod Christus excepit ex
Maria non credatur adsumptum. Si uero adsumptum est ex Maria neque
permansit perfecta humana diuinaque natura, id tribus effici potuit modis:
aut enim diuinitas in humanitatem translata est aut humanitas in
diuinitatem aut utraeque in se ita temperatae sunt atque commixtae, ut
neutra substantia propriam formam teneret. Sed si diuinitas in humanitatem
translata est, factum est, quod credi nefas est, ut humanitate inmutabili
substantia permanente diuinitas uerteretur et quod passibile atque mutabile
naturaliter exsisteret, id inmutabile permaneret, quod uero inmutabile
atque inpassibile naturaliter creditur, id in rem mutabilem uerteretur. Hoc
igitur fieri nulla ratione contingit. Sed humana forsitan natura in
deitatem uideatur esse conuersa. Hoc uero qui fieri potest, si diuinitas in
generatione Christi et humanam animam suscepit et corpus? Non enim omnis
res in rem omnem uerti ac transmutari potest. Nam cum substantiarum aliae
sint corporeae, aliae incorporeae, neque corporea in incorpoream neque
incorporea in eam quae corpus est mutari potest, nec uero incorporea in se
inuicem formas proprias mutant; sola enim mutari transformarique in se
possunt quae habent unius materiae commune subiectum, nec haec omnia, sed
ea quae in se et facere et pati possunt. Id uero probatur hoc modo: neque
enim potest aes in lapidem permutari nec uero idem aes in herbam nec
quodlibet aliud corpus in quodlibet aliud transfigurari potest, nisi et
eadem sit materia rerum in se transeuntium et a se et facere et pati
possint, ut, cum uinum atque aqua miscentur, utraque sunt talia quae actum
sibi passionemque communicent. Potest enim aquae qualitas a uini qualitate
aliquid pati; potest item uini ab aquae qualitate aliquid pati. Atque
idcirco si multum quidem fuerit aquae, uini uero paululum, non dicuntur
inmixta, sed alterum alterius qualitate corrumpitur. Si quis enim uinum
fundat in mare, non mixtum est mari uinum sed in mare corruptum, idcirco
quoniam qualitas aquae multitudine sui corporis nihil passa est a qualitate
uini, sed potius in se ipsam uini qualitatem propria multitudine
commutauit. Si uero sint mediocres sibique aequales uel paulo inaequales
naturae quae a se facere et pati possunt, illae miscentur et mediocribus
inter se qualitatibus temperantur. Atque haec quidem in corporibus neque
his omnibus, sed tantum quae a se, ut dictum est, et facere et pati possunt
communi atque eadem materia subiecta. Omne enim corpus quod in generatione
et corruptione subsistit communem uidetur habere materiam, sed non omne ab
omni uel in omni uel facere aliquid uel pati potest. Corpora uero in
incorporea nulla ratione poterunt permutari, quoniam nulla communi materia
subiecta participant quae susceptis qualitatibus in alterutram permutetur.
Omnis enim natura incorporeae substantiae nullo materiae nititur
fundamento; nullum uero corpus est cui non sit materia subiecta. Quod cum
ita sit cumque ne ea quidem quae communem materiam naturaliter habent in se
transeant, nisi illis adsit potestas in se et a se faciendi ac patiendi,
multo magis in se non permutabuntur quibus non modo communis materia non
est, sed cum alia res materiae fundamento nititur ut corpus, alia omnino
materiae subiecto non egeat ut incorporeum.

Non igitur fieri potest, ut corpus in incorporalem speciem permutetur, nec
uero fieri potest, ut incorporalia in sese commixtione aliqua permutentur.
Quorum enim communis nulla materia est, nec in se uerti ac permutari
queunt. Nulla autem est incorporalibus materia rebus; non poterunt igitur
in se inuicem permutari. Sed anima et deus incorporeae substantiae recte
creduntur; non est igitur humana anima in diuinitatem a qua adsumpta est
permutata. Quod si neque corpus neque anima in diuinitatem potuit uerti,
nullo modo fieri potuit, ut humanitas conuerteretur in deum. Multo minus
uero credi potest, ut utraque in sese confunderentur, quoniam neque
incorporalitas transire ad corpus potest neque rursus e conuerso corpus ad
incorporalitatem, quando quidem nulla his materia subiecta communis est
quae alterutris substantiarum qualitatibus permutetur.

At hi ita aiunt ex duabus quidem naturis Christum consistere, in duabus
uero minime, hoc scilicet intendentes, quoniam quod ex duabus consistit ita
unum fieri potest, ut illa ex quibus dicitur constare non maneant; ueluti
cum mel aquae confunditur neutrum manet, sed alterum alterius copulatione
corruptum quiddam tertium fecit, ita illud quidem quod ex melle atque aqua
tertium fit constare ex utrisque dicitur, in utrisque uero negatur. Non
enim poterit in utrisque constare, quando utrorumque natura non permanet.
Ex utrisque enim constare potest, licet ea ex quibus coniungitur alterutra
qualitate corrupta sint; in utrisque uero huiusmodi constare non poterit,
quoniam ea quae in se transfusa sunt non manent ac non sunt utraque in
quibus constare uideatur, cum ex utrisque constet in se inuicem qualitatum
mutatione transfusis.

Catholici uero utrumque rationabiliter confitentur, nam et ex utrisque
naturis Christum et in utrisque consistere. Sed id qua ratione dicatur,
paulo posterius explicabo. Nunc illud est manifestum conuictam esse
Eutychis sententiam eo nomine, quod cum tribus modis fieri possit, ut ex
duabus naturis una subsistat, ut aut diuinitas in humanitatem translata sit
aut humanitas in diuinitatem aut utraque permixta sint, nullum horum modum
fieri potuisse superius dicta argumentatione declaratur.




  VI.

  I think enough has been said on the supposition that we should believe
  that the body which Christ received was not taken from Mary. But if it
  was taken from Mary and the human and divine natures did not continue,
  each in its perfection, this may have happened in one of three ways.
  Either Godhead was translated into manhood, or manhood into Godhead, or
  both were so modified and mingled that neither substance kept its proper
  form. But if Godhead was translated into manhood, that has happened
  which piety forbids us to believe, viz. while the manhood continued in
  unchangeable substance Godhead was changed, and that which was by nature
  passible and mutable remained immutable, while that which we believe to
  be by nature immutable and impassible was changed into a mutable thing.
  This cannot happen on any show of reasoning. But perchance the human
  nature may seem to be changed into Godhead. Yet how can this be if
  Godhead in the conception of Christ received both human soul and body?
  Things cannot be promiscuously changed and interchanged. For since some
  substances are corporeal and others incorporeal, neither can a corporeal
  substance be changed into an incorporeal, nor can an incorporeal be
  changed into that which is body, nor yet incorporeals interchange their
  proper forms; for only those things can be interchanged and transformed
  which possess the common substrate of the same matter, nor can all of
  these so behave, but only those which can act upon and be acted on by
  each other. Now this is proved as follows: bronze can no more be
  converted into stone than it can be into grass, and generally no body
  can be transformed into any other body unless the things which pass into
  each other have a common matter and can act upon and be acted on by each
  other, as when wine and water are mingled both are of such a nature as
  to allow reciprocal action and influence. For the quality of water can
  be influenced in some degree by that of wine, similarly the quality of
  wine can be influenced by that of water. And therefore if there be a
  great deal of water but very little wine, they are not said to be
  mingled, but the one is ruined by the quality of the other. For if you
  pour wine into the sea the wine is not mingled with the sea but is lost
  in the sea, simply because the quality of the water owing to its bulk
  has been in no way affected by the quality of the wine, but rather by
  its own bulk has changed the quality of the wine into water. But if the
  natures which are capable of reciprocal action and influence are in
  moderate proportion and equal or only slightly unequal, they are really
  mingled and tempered by the qualities which are in moderate relation to
  each other. This indeed takes place in bodies but not in all bodies, but
  only in those, as has been said, which are capable of reciprocal action
  and influence and have the same matter subject to their qualities. For
  all bodies which subsist in conditions of birth and decay seem to
  possess a common matter, but all bodies are not capable of reciprocal
  action and influence. But corporeals cannot in any way be changed into
  incorporeals because they do not share in any common underlying matter
  which can be changed into this or that thing by taking on its qualities.
  For the nature of no incorporeal substance rests upon a material basis;
  but there is no body that has not matter as a substrate. Since this is
  so, and since not even those things which naturally have a common matter
  can pass over into each other unless they have the power of acting on
  each other and being acted upon by each other, far more will those
  things not suffer interchange which not only have no common matter but
  are different in substance, since one of them, being body, rests on a
  basis of matter, while the other, being incorporeal, cannot possibly
  stand in need of a material substrate.

  It is therefore impossible for a body to be changed into an incorporeal
  species, nor will it ever be possible for incorporeals to be changed
  into each other by any process of mingling. For things which have no
  common matter cannot be changed and converted one into another. But
  incorporeal things have no matter; they can never, therefore, be changed
  about among themselves. But the soul and God are rightly believed to be
  incorporeal substances; therefore the human soul has not been converted
  into the Godhead by which it was assumed. But if neither body nor soul
  can be turned into Godhead, it could not possibly happen that manhood
  should be transformed into God. But it is much less credible that the
  two should be confounded together since neither can incorporality pass
  over to body, nor again, contrariwise, can body pass over into
  incorporality when these have no common matter underlying them which can
  be converted by the qualities of one of two substances.

  But the Eutychians say that Christ consists indeed of two natures, but
  not in two natures, meaning, no doubt, thereby, that a thing which
  consists of two elements can so far become one, that the elements of
  which it is said to be made up disappear; just as, for example, when
  honey is mixed with water neither remains, but the one thing being
  spoilt by conjunction with the other produces a certain third thing, so
  that third thing which is produced by the combination of honey and water
  is said to consist of both, but not in both. For it can never consist in
  both so long as the nature of both does not continue. For it can consist
  of both even though each element of which it is compounded has been
  spoiled by the quality of the other; but it can never consist in both
  natures of this kind since the elements which have been transmuted into
  each other do not continue, and both the elements in which it seems to
  consist cease to be, since it consists of two things translated into
  each other by change of qualities.

  But Catholics in accordance with reason confess both, for they say that
  Christ consists both of and in two natures. How this can be affirmed I
  will explain a little later. One thing is now clear; the opinion of
  Eutyches has been confuted on the ground that, although there are three
  ways by which the one nature can subsist of the two, viz. either the
  translation of divinity into humanity or of humanity into divinity or
  the compounding of both together, the foregoing train of reasoning
  proves that no one of the three ways is a possibility.







VII.

Restat ut, quemadmodum catholica fides dicat, et in utrisque naturis
Christum et ex utrisque consistere doceamus.

Ex utrisque naturis aliquid consistere duo significat: unum quidem, cum ita
dicimus aliquid ex duabus naturis iungi sicut ex melle atque aqua, id autem
est ut ex quolibet modo confusis, uel si una uertatur in alteram uel si
utraeque in se inuicem misceantur, nullo modo tamen utraeque permaneant;
secundum hunc modum Eutyches ait ex utrisque naturis Christum consistere.

Alter uero modus est ex utrisque consistendi quod ita ex duabus iunctum
est, ut illa tamen ex quibus iunctum esse dicitur maneant nec in alterutra
uertantur, ut cum dicimus coronam ex auro gemmisque compositam. Hic neque
aurum in gemmas translatum est neque in aurum gemma conuersa, sed utraque
permanent nec formam propriam derelinquunt. Talia ergo ex aliquibus
constantia et in his constare dicimus ex quibus consistere praedicantur.
Tunc enim possumus dicere coronam gemmis auroque consistere; sunt enim
gemmae atque aurum in quibus corona consistat. Nam in priore modo non est
mel atque aqua in quibus illud quod ex utrisque iungitur constet. Cum
igitur utrasque manere naturas in Christo fides catholica confiteatur
perfectasque easdem persistere nec alteram in alteram transmutari, iure
dicit et in utrisque naturis Christum et ex utrisque consistere: in
utrisque quidem, quia manent utraeque, ex utrisque uero, quia utrarumque
adunatione manentium una persona fit Christi. Non autem secundum eam
significationem ex utrisque naturis Christum iunctum esse fides catholica
tenet, secundum quam Eutyches pronuntiat. Nam ille talem significationem
coniunctionis ex utraque natura sumit, ut non confiteatur in utrisque
consistere, neque enim utrasque manere; catholicus uero eam significationem
ex utrisque consistendi sumit quae illi sit proxima eamque conseruet quae
in utrisque consistere confitetur.

Aequiuocum igitur est "ex utrisque consistere" ac potius amphibolum et
gemina significatione diuersa designans: una quidem significatione non
manere substantias ex quibus illud quod copulatum est dicatur esse
coniunctum, alio modo significans ita ex utrisque coniunctum, ut utraque
permaneant.

Hoc igitur expedito aequiuocationis atque ambiguitatis nodo nihil est ultra
quod possit opponi, quin id sit quod firma ueraque fides catholica
continet; eundem Christum hominem esse perfectum, eundem deum eundemque qui
homo sit perfectus atque deus unum esse deum ac dei filium, nec
quaternitatem trinitati adstrui, dum homo additur supra perfectum deum, sed
unam eandemque personam numerum trinitatis explere, ut cum humanitas passa
sit, deus tamen passus esse dicatur, non quo ipsa deitas humanitas facta
sit, sed quod a deitate fuerit adsumpta. Item qui homo est, dei filius
appellatur non substantia diuinitatis sed humanitatis, quae tamen
diuinitati naturali unitate coniuncta est. Et cum haec ita intellegentia
discernantur permisceanturque, tamen unus idemque et homo sit perfectus et
deus: deus quidem, quod ipse sit ex patris substantia genitus, homo uero,
quod ex Maria sit uirgine procreatus. Itemque qui homo, deus eo quod a deo
fuerit adsumptus, et qui deus, homo, quoniam uestitus homine sit. Cumque in
eadem persona aliud sit diuinitas quae suscepit, aliud quam suscepit
humanitas, idem tamen deus atque homo est. Nam si hominem intellegas, idem
homo est atque deus, quoniam homo ex natura, deus adsumptione. Si uero deum
intellegas, idem deus est atque homo, quoniam natura deus est, homo
adsumptione. Fitque in eo gemina natura geminaque substantia, quoniam homo-
deus unaque persona, quoniam idem homo atque deus. Mediaque est haec inter
duas haereses uia sicut uirtutes quoque medium tenent. Omnis enim uirtus in
medio rerum decore locata consistit. Siquid enim uel ultra uel infra quam
oportuerit fiat, a uirtute disceditur. Medietatem igitur uirtus tenet.

Quocirca si quattuor haec neque ultra neque infra esse possunt, ut in
Christo aut duae naturae sint duaeque personae ut Nestorius ait, aut una
persona unaque natura ut Eutyches ait, aut duae naturae sed una persona ut
catholica fides credit, aut una natura duaeque personae,[ ] cumque duas
quidem naturas duasque personas in ea quae contra Nestorium dicta est
responsione conuicerimus (unam uero personam unamque naturam esse non posse
Eutyche proponente monstrauimus neque tamen tam amens quisquam huc usque
exstitit, ut unam in eo naturam crederet sed geminas esse personas), restat
ut ea sit uera quam fides catholica pronuntiat geminam substantiam sed unam
esse personam. Quia uero paulo ante diximus Eutychen confiteri duas quidem
in Christo ante adunationem naturas, unam uero post adunationem, cumque
hunc errorem duplicem interpretaremur celare sententiam, ut haec adunatio
aut generatione fieret, cum ex Maria corpus hominis minime sumeretur aut ad
sumptum[ ] quidem ex Maria per resurrectionem fieret adunatio, de utrisque
quidem partibus idonee ut arbitror disputatum est. Nunc quaerendum est
quomodo fieri potuerit ut duae naturae in unam substantiam miscerentur.


[ ] quod nullus haereticus adhuc attigit _addunt codices quidam_.

[ ] sumptum _codd._; adsumptum _preli diabolus_, ad sumptum _nos_.




  VII.

  It remains for us to show how in accordance with the affirmation of
  Catholic belief Christ consists at once in and of both natures.

  The statement that a thing consists of two natures bears two meanings;
  one, when we say that anything is a union of two natures, as e.g. honey
  and water, where the union is such that in the combination, however the
  elements be confounded, whether by one nature changing into the other,
  or by both mingling with each other, the two entirely disappear. This is
  the way in which according to Eutyches Christ consists of two natures.

  The other way in which a thing can consist of two natures is when it is
  so combined of two that the elements of which it is said to be combined
  continue without changing into each other, as when we say that a crown
  is composed of gold and gems. Here neither is the gold converted into
  gems nor is the gem turned into gold, but both continue without
  surrendering their proper form.

  Things then like this, composed of various elements, we say consist also
  in the elements of which they are composed. For in this case we can say
  that a crown is composed of gems and gold, for gems and gold are that in
  which the crown consists. For in the former mode of composition honey
  and water is not that in which the resulting union of both consists.

  Since then the Catholic Faith confesses that both natures continue in
  Christ and that they both remain perfect, neither being transformed into
  the other, it says with right that Christ consists both in and of the
  two natures; _in_ the two because both continue, _of_ the two
  because the One Person of Christ is formed by the union of the two
  continuing natures.

  But the Catholic Faith does not hold the union of Christ out of two
  natures according to that sense which Eutyches puts upon it. For the
  interpretation of the conjunction out of two natures which he adopts
  forbids him to confess consistence in two or the continuance of the two
  either; but the Catholic adopts an interpretation of the consistence out
  of two which comes near to that of Eutyches, yet keeps the
  interpretation which confesses consistence in two.

  "To consist of two natures" is therefore an equivocal or rather a
  doubtful term of double meaning denoting different things; according to
  one of its interpretations the substances out of which the union is said
  to have been composed do not continue, according to another the union
  effected of the two is such that both natures continue.

  When once this knot of doubt or ambiguity has been untied, nothing
  further can be advanced to shake the true and solid content of the
  Catholic Faith, which is that the same Christ is perfect man and God,
  and that He who is perfect man and God is One God and Son of Man, that,
  however, quaternity is not added to the Trinity by the addition of human
  nature to perfect Godhead, but that one and the same Person completes
  the number of the Trinity, so that, although it was the manhood which
  suffered, yet God can be said to have suffered, not by manhood becoming
  Godhead but by manhood being assumed by Godhead. Further, He who is man
  is called Son of God not in virtue of divine but of human substance,
  which latter none the less was conjoined to Godhead in a unity of
  natures. And although thought is able to distinguish and combine the
  manhood and the Godhead, yet one and the same is perfect man and God,
  God because He was begotten of the substance of the Father, but man
  because He was engendered of the Virgin Mary. And further He who is man
  is God in that manhood was assumed by God, and He who is God is man in
  that God was clothed with manhood. And although in the same Person the
  Godhead which took manhood is different from the manhood which It took,
  yet the same is God and man. For if you think of man, the same is man
  and God, being man by nature, God by assumption. But if you think of
  God, the same is God and man, being God by nature, man by assumption.
  And in Him nature becomes double and substance double because He is God-
  man, and One Person since the same is man and God. This is the middle
  way between two heresies, just as virtues also hold a middle place.[ ]
  For every virtue has a place of honour midway between extremes. For if
  it stands beyond or below where it should it ceases to be virtue. And so
  virtue holds a middle place.

  Wherefore if the following four assertions can be said to be neither
  beyond or below reason, viz. that in Christ are either two Natures and
  two Persons as Nestorius says, or one Person and one Nature as Eutyches
  says, or two Natures but one Person as the Catholic Faith believes, or
  one Nature and two Persons, and inasmuch as we have refuted the doctrine
  of two Natures and two Persons in our argument against Nestorius and
  incidentally have shown that the one Person and one Nature suggested by
  Eutyches is impossible--since there has never been anyone so mad as to
  believe that His Nature was single but His Person double--it remains
  that the article of belief must be true which the Catholic Faith
  affirms, viz. that the Nature is double, but the Person one. But as I
  have just now remarked that Eutyches confesses two Natures in Christ
  before the union, but only one after the union, and since I proved that
  under this error lurked two opposite opinions, one, that the union was
  brought about by conception although the human body was certainly not
  taken from Mary; the other, that the body taken from Mary formed part of
  the union by means of the Resurrection, I have, it seems to me, argued
  the twofold aspect of the case as completely as it deserves. What we
  have now to inquire is how it came to pass that two Natures were
  combined into one Substance.


  [ ] _Vide supra_, p.   note.




VIII.

Verumtamen est etiam nunc et alia quaestio quae ab his inferri potest qui
corpus humanum ex Maria sumptum esse non credunt, sed alias fuisse
sequestratum praeparatumque quod in adunatione ex Mariae utero gigni ac
proferri uideretur. Aiunt enim: si ex homine sumptum est corpus, homo uero
omnis ex prima praeuaricatione non solum peccato et morte tenebatur, uerum
etiam affectibus peccatorum erat implicitus, eaque illi fuit poena peccati,
ut, cum morte teneretur obstrictus, tamen esset reus etiam uoluntate
peccandi, cur in Christo neque peccatum fuit neque uoluntas ulla peccandi?
Et omnino habet animaduertendam dubitationem talis quaestio. Si enim ex
carne humana Christi corpus adsumptum est, dubitari potest, quaenam caro
haec quae adsumpta sit esse uideatur. Eum quippe saluauit quem etiam
adsumpsit; sin uero talem hominem adsumpsit qualis Adam fuit ante peccatum,
integram quidem uidetur humanam adsumpsisse naturam, sed tamen quae
medicina penitus non egebat. Quomodo autem fieri potest, ut talem
adsumpserit hominem qualis Adam fuit, cum in Adam potuerit esse peccandi
uoluntas atque affectio, unde factum est ut etiam praetergressis diuinis
praeceptis inoboedientiae delictis teneretur adstrictus? In Christo uero ne
uoluntas quidem ulla creditur fuisse peccandi, cum praesertim si tale
corpus hominis adsumpsit quale Adae ante peccatum fuit, non debuerit esse
mortalis, quoniam Adam, si non peccasset, mortem nulla ratione sensisset.
Cum igitur Christus non peccauerit, quaerendum est cur senserit mortem, si
Adae corpus ante quam peccaret adsumpsit. Quod si talem statum suscepit
hominis qualis Adae post peccatum fuit, uidetur etiam Christo non defuisse
necessitas, ut et delictis subiceretur et passionibus confunderetur
obductisque iudicii regulis bonum a malo non sincera integritate
discerneret, quoniam has omnes poenas Adam delicti praeuaricatione
suscepit.

Contra quos respondendum est tres intellegi hominum posse status: unum
quidem Adae ante delictum in quo, tametsi ab eo mors aberat nec adhuc ullo
se delicto polluerat, poterat tamen in eo uoluntas esse peccandi: alter in
quo mutari potuisset, si firmiter in dei praeceptis manere uoluisset, tunc
enim id addendum foret ut non modo non peccaret aut peccare uellet sed ne
posset quidem aut peccare aut uelle delinquere. Tertius status est post
delictum in quo mors illum necessario subsecuta est et peccatum ipsum
uoluntasque peccati. Quorum summitatum atque contrariorum haec loca sunt:
is status qui praemium esset, si in praeceptis dei Adam manere uoluisset et
is qui poenae fuit, quoniam manere noluit; in illo enim nec mors esset nec
peccatum nec uoluntas ulla peccati, in hoc uero et mors et peccatum et
delinquendi omnis affectio omniaque in perniciem prona nec quicquam in se
opis habentia, ut post lapsum posset adsurgere. Ille uero medius status in
quo praesentia quidem mortis uel peccati aberat, potestas uero utriusque
constabat, inter utrumque statum est conlocatus. Ex his igitur tribus
statibus Christus corporeae naturae singulas quodam modo indidit causas;
nam quod mortale corpus adsumpsit ut mortem a genere humano fugaret, in eo
statu ponendum est quod post Adae praeuaricationem poenaliter inflictum
est. Quod uero non fuit in eo uoluntas ulla peccati, ex eo sumptum est
statu qui esse potuisset, nisi uoluntatem insidiantis fraudibus
applicasset. Restat igitur tertius status id est medius, ille scilicet qui
eo tempore fuit, cum nec mors aderat et adesse poterat delinquendi
uoluntas. In hoc igitur Adam talis fuit ut manducaret ac biberet, ut
accepta digereret, ut laberetur in somnum et alia quae ei non defuerunt
humana quidem sed concessa et quae nullam poenam mortis inferrent.

Quae omnia habuisse Christum dubium non est; nam et manducauit et bibit et
humani corporis officio functus est. Neque enim tanta indigentia in Adam
fuisse credenda est ut nisi manducasset uiuere non potuisset, sed, si ex
omni quidem ligno escam sumeret, semper uiuere potuisset hisque non mori;
idcirco paradisi fructibus indigentiam explebat. Quam indigentiam fuisse in
Christo nullus ignorat, sed potestate non necessitate; et ipsa indigentia
ante resurrectionem in eo fuit, post resurrectionem uero talis exstitit ut
ita illud corpus inmutaretur humanum, sicut Adae praeter praeuaricationis
uinculum mutari potuisset. Quodque nos ipse dominus Iesus Christus uotis
docuit optare, ut fiat uoluntas eius sicut in caelo et in terra et ut
adueniat eius regnum et nos liberet a malo. Haec enim omnia illa beatissima
humani generis fideliter credentium inmutatio deprecatur.

Haec sunt quae ad te de fidei meae credulitate scripsi. Qua in re si quid
perperam dictum est, non ita sum amator mei, ut ea quae semel effuderim
meliori sententiae anteferre contendam. Si enim nihil est ex nobis boni,
nihil est quod in nostris sententiis amare debeamus. Quod si ex illo cuncta
sunt bona qui solus est bonus, illud potius bonum esse credendum est quod
illa incommutabilis bonitas atque omnium bonorum causa perscribit.




  VIII.

  Nevertheless there remains yet another question which can be advanced by
  those who do not believe that the human body was taken from Mary, but
  that the body was in some other way set apart and prepared, which in the
  moment of union appeared to be conceived and born of Mary's womb. For
  they say: if the body was taken from man while every man was, from the
  time of the first disobedience, not only enslaved by sin and death but
  also involved in sinful desires, and if his punishment for sin was that,
  although he was held in chains of death, yet at the same time he should
  be guilty because of the will to sin, why was there in Christ neither
  sin nor any will to sin? And certainly such a question is attended by a
  difficulty which deserves attention. For if the body of Christ was
  assumed from human flesh, it is open to doubt of what kind we must
  consider that flesh to be which was assumed.

  In truth, the manhood which He assumed He likewise saved; but if He
  assumed such manhood as Adam had before sin, He appears to have assumed
  a human nature complete indeed, but one which was in no need of healing.
  But how can it be that He assumed such manhood as Adam had when there
  could be in Adam both the will and the desire to sin, whence it came to
  pass that even after the divine commands had been broken, he was still
  held captive to sins of disobedience? But we believe that in Christ
  there was never any will to sin, because especially if He assumed such a
  human body as Adam had before his sin, He could not be mortal, since
  Adam, had he not sinned, would in no wise have suffered death. Since,
  then, Christ never sinned, it must be asked why He suffered death if He
  assumed the body of Adam before sin. But if He accepted human conditions
  such as Adam's were after sin, it seems that Christ could not avoid
  being subject to sin, perplexed by passions, and, since the canons of
  judgment were obscured, prevented from distinguishing with unclouded
  reason between good and evil, since Adam by his disobedience incurred
  all these penalties of crime.

  To whom we must reply[ ] that there are three states of man to
  envisage: one, that of Adam before his sin, in which, though free from
  death and still unstained by any sin, he could yet have within him the
  will to sin; the second, that in which he might have suffered change had
  he chosen to abide steadfastly in the commands of God, for then it could
  have been further granted him not only not to sin or wish to sin, but to
  be incapable of sinning or of the will to transgress. The third state is
  the state after sin, into which man needs must be pursued by death and
  sin and the sinful will. Now the points of extreme divergence between
  these states are the following: one state would have been for Adam a
  reward if he had chosen to abide in God's laws; the other was his
  punishment because he would not abide in them; for in the former state
  there would have been no death nor sin nor sinful will, in the latter
  there was both death and sin and every desire to transgress, and a
  general tendency to ruin and a condition helpless to render possible a
  rise after the Fall. But that middle state from which actual death or
  sin was absent, but the power for both remained, is situate between the
  other two.

  Each one, then, of these three states somehow supplied to Christ a cause
  for his corporeal nature; thus His assumption of a mortal body in order
  to drive death far from the human race belongs properly to that state
  which was laid on man by way of punishment after Adam's sin, whereas the
  fact that there was in Christ no sinful will is borrowed from that state
  which might have been if Adam had not surrendered his will to the frauds
  of the tempter. There remains, then, the third or middle state, to wit,
  that which was before death had come and while the will to sin might yet
  be present. In this state, therefore, Adam was able to eat and drink,
  digest the food he took, fall asleep, and perform all the other
  functions which always belonged to him as man, though they were allowed
  and brought with them no pain of death.

  There is no doubt that Christ was in all points thus conditioned; for He
  ate and drank and discharged the bodily function of the human body. For
  we must not think that Adam was at the first subject to such need that
  unless he ate he could not have lived, but rather that, if he had taken
  food from every tree, he could have lived for ever, and by that food
  have escaped death; and so by the fruits of the Garden he satisfied a
  need.[ ] And all know that in Christ the same need dwelt, but lying in
  His own power and not laid upon Him. And this need was in Him before the
  Resurrection, but after the Resurrection He became such that His human
  body was changed as Adam's might have been but for the bands of
  disobedience. Which state, moreover, our Lord Jesus Christ Himself
  taught us to desire in our prayers, asking that His Will be done as in
  heaven so on earth, and that His Kingdom come, and that He may deliver
  us from evil. For all these things are sought in prayer by those members
  of the human family who rightly believe and who are destined to undergo
  that most blessed change of all.[ ]

  So much have I written to you concerning what I believe should be
  believed. In which matter if I have said aught amiss, I am not so well
  pleased with myself as to try to press my effusions in the face of wiser
  judgment. For if there is no good thing in us there is nothing we should
  fancy in our opinions. But if all things are good as coming from Him who
  alone is good, that rather must be thought good which the Unchangeable
  Good and Cause of all Good indites.


  [ ] This _respondendum_ has the true Thomist ring.

  [ ] Adam did not need to eat in order to live, but if he had not eaten
  he would have suffered hunger, etc.

  [ ] The whole of this passage might be set in _Tr._ iv. without
  altering the tone.








ANICII MANLII SEVERINI BOETHII

V.C. ET INL. EXCONS. ORD. EX MAG. OFF. PATRICII

PHILOSOPHIAE CONSOLATIONIS

LIBER I.




I.

Carmina qui quondam studio florente peregi,
  Flebilis heu maestos cogor inire modos.
Ecce mihi lacerae dictant scribenda Camenae
  Et ueris elegi fletibus ora rigant.
Has saltem nullus potuit peruincere terror,                                
  Ne nostrum comites prosequerentur iter.
Gloria felicis olim uiridisque iuuentae
  Solantur maesti nunc mea fata senis.
Venit enim properata malis inopina senectus
  Et dolor aetatem iussit inesse suam.                                    
Intempestiui funduntur uertice cani
  Et tremit effeto corpore laxa cutis.
Mors hominum felix quae se nec dulcibus annis
  Inserit et maestis saepe uocata uenit.
Eheu quam surda miseros auertitur aure                                    
  Et flentes oculos claudere saeua negat.
Dum leuibus male fida bonis fortuna faueret,
  Paene caput tristis merserat hora meum.
Nunc quia fallacem mutauit nubila uultum,
  Protrahit ingratas impia uita moras.                                    
Quid me felicem totiens iactastis amici?
  Qui cecidit, stabili non erat ille gradu.








  THE FIRST BOOK OF BOETHIUS

  CONTAINING HIS COMPLAINT AND MISERIES




  I.

  I that with youthful heat did verses write,
  Must now my woes in doleful tunes indite.
  My work is framed by Muses torn and rude,
  And my sad cheeks are with true tears bedewed:
  For these alone no terror could affray
  From being partners of my weary way.
  The art that was my young life's joy and glory
  Becomes my solace now I'm old and sorry;
  Sorrow has filched my youth from me, the thief!
  My days are numbered not by time but Grief.[ ]
  Untimely hoary hairs cover my head,
  And my loose skin quakes on my flesh half dead.
  O happy death, that spareth sweetest years,
  And comes in sorrow often called with tears.
  Alas, how deaf is he to wretch's cries;
  And loath he is to close up weeping eyes;
  While trustless chance me with vain favours crowned,
  That saddest hour my life had almost drowned:
  Now she hath clouded her deceitful face,
  My spiteful days prolong their weary race.
  My friends, why did you count me fortunate?
  He that is fallen, ne'er stood in settled state.


  [ ] Literally "For Old Age, unlooked for, sped by evils, has come, and
  Grief has bidden her years lie on me."




I.

Haec dum mecum tacitus ipse reputarem querimoniamque lacrimabilem stili
officio signarem, adstitisse mihi supra uerticem uisa est mulier reuerendi
admodum uultus, oculis ardentibus et ultra communem hominum ualentiam
perspicacibus colore uiuido atque inexhausti uigoris, quamuis ita aeui
plena foret ut nullo modo nostrae crederetur aetatis, statura discretionis
ambiguae. Nam nunc quidem ad communem sese hominum mensuram cohibebat, nunc
uero pulsare caelum summi uerticis cacumine uidebatur; quae cum altius
caput extulisset, ipsum etiam caelum penetrabat respicientiumque hominum
frustrabatur intuitum. Vestes erant tenuissimis filis subtili artificio,
indissolubili materia perfectae quas, uti post eadem prodente cognoui, suis
manibus ipsa texuerat. Quarum speciem, ueluti fumosas imagines solet,
caligo quaedam neglectae uetustatis obduxerat. Harum in extrema margine
[Greek: PI] Graecum, in supremo uero [Greek: THETA], legebatur intextum.
Atque inter utrasque litteras in scalarum modum gradus quidam insigniti
uidebantur quibus ab inferiore ad superius elementum esset ascensus. Eandem
tamen uestem uiolentorum quorundam sciderant manus et particulas quas
quisque potuit abstulerant. Et dextera quidem eius libellos, sceptrum uero
sinistra gestabat.

Quae ubi poeticas Musas uidit nostro adsistentes toro fletibusque meis
uerba dictantes, commota paulisper ac toruis inflammata luminibus: "Quis,"
inquit, "has scenicas meretriculas ad hunc aegrum permisit accedere quae
dolores eius non modo nullis remediis fouerent, uerum dulcibus insuper
alerent uenenis? Hae sunt enim quae infructuosis affectuum spinis uberem
fructibus rationis segetem necant hominumque mentes assuefaciunt morbo, non
liberant. At si quem profanum, uti uulgo solitum uobis, blanditiae uestrae
detraherent, minus moleste ferendum putarem; nihil quippe in eo nostrae
operae laederentur. Hunc uero Eleaticis atque Academicis studiis
innutritum? Sed abite potius Sirenes usque in exitium dulces meisque eum
Musis curandum sanandumque relinquite."

His ille chorus increpitus deiecit humi maestior uultum confessusque rubore
uerecundiam limen tristis excessit. At ego cuius acies lacrimis mersa
caligaret nec dinoscere possem, quaenam haec esset mulier tam imperiosae
auctoritatis, obstipui uisuque in terram defixo quidnam deinceps esset
actura, exspectare tacitus coepi. Tum illa propius accedens in extrema
lectuli mei parte consedit meumque intuens uultum luctu grauem atque in
humum maerore deiectum his uersibus de nostrae mentis perturbatione
conquesta est.




  I.

  While I ruminated these things with myself, and determined to set forth
  my woful complaint in writing, methought I saw a woman stand above my
  head, having a grave countenance, glistening clear eye, and of quicker
  sight than commonly Nature doth afford; her colour fresh and bespeaking
  unabated vigour, and yet discovering so many years, that she could not
  at all be thought to belong to our times; her stature uncertain and
  doubtful, for sometime she exceeded not the common height of men, and
  sometime she seemed to touch the heavens with her head, and if she
  lifted it up to the highest, she pierced the very heavens, so that she
  could not be seen by the beholders; her garments were made of most fine
  threads with cunning workmanship into an ever-during stuff, which (as I
  knew afterward by her own report) she had woven with her own hands. A
  certain duskishness caused by negligence and time had darkened their
  colour, as it is wont to happen when pictures stand in a smoky room. In
  the lower part of them was placed the Greek letter [Greek: PI], and in
  the upper [Greek: THETA],[ ] and betwixt the two letters, in the manner
  of stairs, there were certain degrees made, by which there was a passage
  from the lower to the higher letter: this her garment had been cut by
  the violence of some, who had taken away such pieces as they could get.
  In her right hand she had certain books, and in her left hand she held a
  sceptre.

  This woman, seeing the poetical Muses standing about my bed, and
  suggesting words to my tears, being moved for a little space, and
  inflamed with angry looks: "Who," saith she, "hath permitted these
  tragical harlots to have access to this sick man, which will not only
  not comfort his grief with wholesome remedies, but also nourish them
  with sugared poison? For these be they which with the fruitless thorns
  of affections do kill the fruitful crop of reason, and do accustom men's
  minds to sickness, instead of curing them. But if your flattery did
  deprive us of some profane fellow,[ ] as commonly it happeneth, I
  should think that it were not so grievously to be taken, for in him our
  labours should receive no harm. But now have you laid hold of him who
  hath been brought up in Eleatical and Academical studies?[ ] Rather get
  you gone, you Sirens pleasant even to destruction, and leave him to my
  Muses to be cured and healed."

  That company being thus checked, overcome with grief, casting their eyes
  upon the ground, and betraying their bashfulness with blushing, went
  sadly away. But I, whose sight was dimmed with tears, so that I could
  not discern what this woman might be, so imperious, and of such
  authority, was astonished, and, fixing my countenance upon the earth,
  began to expect with silence what she would do afterward. Then she
  coming nigher, sat down at my bed's feet, and beholding my countenance
  sad with mourning, and cast upon the ground with grief, complained of
  the perturbation of my mind with these verses.


  [ ] Cf. "est enim philosophia genus, species uero eius duae, una quae
  [Greek: theoraetikae] dicitur, altera quae [Greek: praktikae], id est
  speculatiua et actiua." Boeth. _In Porph. Dial._ i.

  [ ] This scorn of the _profanum vulgus_ appears again and again in the
  theological tractates, e.g. _Tr._ iii. (_supra_, p.  ), _Tr._ v.
  (_supra_, p.  ).

  [ ] Zeno of Elea invented Dialectic: Plato was the first to lecture on
  philosophy in the gymnasium of the Academia.




II.

Heu quam praecipiti mersa profundo
Mens hebet et propria luce relicta
Tendit in externas ire tenebras,
Terrenis quotiens flatibus aucta
Crescit in inmensum noxia cura.                                            
Hic quondam caelo liber aperto
Suetus in aetherios ire meatus
Cernebat rosei lumina solis,
Visebat gelidae sidera lunae
Et quaecumque uagos stella recursus                                       
Exercet uarios flexa per orbes,
Comprensam numeris uictor habebat.
Quin etiam causas unde sonora
Flamina sollicitent aequora ponti,
Quis uoluat stabilem spiritus orbem                                       
Vel cur hesperias sidus in undas
Casurum rutilo surgat ab ortu,
Quid ueris placidas temperet horas,
Vt terram roseis floribus ornet,
Quis dedit ut pleno fertilis anno                                         
Autumnus grauidis influat uuis
Rimari solitus atque latentis
Naturae uarias reddere causas,
Nunc iacet effeto lumine mentis
Et pressus grauibus colla catenis                                         
Decliuemque gerens pondere uultum
Cogitur, heu, stolidam cernere terram.




  II.

  Alas, how thy dull mind is headlong cast
  In depths of woe, where, all her light once lost,
  She doth to walk in utter darkness haste,
  While cares grow great with earthly tempests tost.
  He that through the opened heavens did freely run,
  And used to travel the celestial ways,
  Marking the rosy splendour of the sun,
  And noting Cynthia's cold and watery rays;
  He that did bravely comprehend in verse
  The different spheres and wandering course of stars,
  He that was wont the causes to rehearse
  Why sounding winds do with the seas make wars,
  What spirit moves the world's well-settled frame,
  And why the sun, whom forth the east doth bring,
  In western waves doth hide his falling flame,
  Searching what power tempers the pleasing Spring
  Which makes the earth her rosy flowers to bear,
  Whose gift it is that Autumn's fruitful season
  Should with full grapes flow in a plenteous year,
  Telling of secret Nature every reason,
  Now having lost the beauty of his mind
  Lies with his neck compassed in ponderous chains;
  His countenance with heavy weight declined,
  Him to behold the sullen earth constrains.




II.

"Sed medicinae," inquit, "tempus est quam querelae." Tum uero totis in me
intenta luminibus: "Tune ille es," ait, "qui nostro quondam lacte nutritus
nostris educatus alimentis in uirilis animi robur euaseras? Atqui talia
contuleramus arma quae nisi prior abiecisses, inuicta te firmitate
tuerentur. Agnoscisne me? Quid taces? Pudore an stupore siluisti? Mallem
pudore, sed te, ut uideo, stupor oppressit." Cumque me non modo tacitum sed
elinguem prorsus mutumque uidisset, admouit pectori meo leniter manum et:
"Nihil," inquit, "pericli est; lethargum patitur communem inlusarum mentium
morbum. Sui paulisper oblitus est; recordabitur facile, si quidem nos ante
cognouerit. Quod ut possit, paulisper lumina eius mortalium rerum nube
caligantia tergamus." Haec dixit oculosque meos fletibus undantes contracta
in rugam ueste siccauit.




  II.

  "But it is rather time," saith she, "to apply remedies, than to make
  complaints." And then looking wistfully upon me: "Art thou he," saith
  she, "which, being long since nursed with our milk, and brought up with
  our nourishments, wert come to man's estate? But we had given thee such
  weapons as, if thou hadst not cast them away, would have made thee
  invincible. Dost thou not know me? Why dost thou not speak? Is it
  shamefastness or insensibleness that makes thee silent? I had rather it
  were shamefastness, but I perceive thou art become insensible." And
  seeing me not only silent but altogether mute and dumb, fair and easily
  she laid her hand upon my breast saying: "There is no danger; he is in a
  lethargy, the common disease of deceived minds; he hath a little forgot
  himself, but he will easily remember himself again, if he be brought to
  know us first. To which end, let us a little wipe his eyes, dimmed with
  the cloud of mortal things." And having thus said, with a corner of her
  garment she dried my eyes which were wet with tears.




III.

Tunc me discussa liquerunt nocte tenebrae
  Luminibusque prior rediit uigor,
Vt, cum praecipiti glomerantur sidera Coro
  Nimbosisque polus stetit imbribus,
Sol latet ac nondum caelo uenientibus astris,                              
  Desuper in terram nox funditur;
Hanc si Threicio Boreas emissus ab antro
  Verberet et clausam reseret diem,
Emicat ac subito uibratus lumine Phoebus
  Mirantes oculos radiis ferit.                                           




  III.

  Then fled the night and darkness did me leave.
  Mine eyes their wonted strength receive,
  As when swift Corus spreads the stars with clouds
    And the clear sky a veil of tempest shrouds
  The sun doth lurk, the earth receiveth night.
    Lacking the boon of starry light;
  But if fierce Boreas, sent from Thrace, make way
    For the restoring of the day,
  Phoebus with fresh and sudden beams doth rise,
    Striking with light our wondering eyes.




III.

Haud aliter tristitiae nebulis dissolutis hausi caelum et ad cognoscendam
medicantis faciem mentem recepi. Itaque ubi in eam deduxi oculos
intuitumque defixi, respicio nutricem meam cuius ab adulescentia laribus
obuersatus fueram Philosophiam. "Et quid," inquam, "tu in has exilii nostri
solitudines o omnium magistra uirtutum supero cardine delapsa uenisti? An
ut tu quoque mecum rea falsis criminationibus agiteris?

"An," inquit illa, "te alumne desererem nec sarcinam quam mei nominis
inuidia sustulisti, communicato tecum labore partirer? Atqui Philosophiae
fas non erat incomitatum relinquere iter innocentis; meam scilicet
criminationem uererer et quasi nouum aliquid acciderit, perhorrescerem?
Nunc enim primum censes apud inprobos mores lacessitam periculis esse
sapientiam? Nonne apud ueteres quoque ante nostri Platonis aetatem magnum
saepe certamen cum stultitiae temeritate certauimus eodemque superstite
praeceptor eius Socrates iniustae uictoriam mortis me adstante promeruit?
Cuius hereditatem cum deinceps Epicureum uulgus ac Stoicum ceterique pro
sua quisque parte raptum ire molirentur meque reclamantem renitentemque
uelut in partem praedae traherent, uestem quam meis texueram manibus,
disciderunt abreptisque ab ea panniculis totam me sibi cessisse credentes
abiere. In quibus quoniam quaedam nostri habitus uestigia uidebantur, meos
esse familiares inprudentia rata nonnullos eorum profanae multitudinis
errore peruertit.

Quod si nec Anaxagorae fugam nec Socratis uenenum nec Zenonis tormenta
quoniam sunt peregrina nouisti, at Canios, at Senecas, at Soranos quorum
nec peruetusta nec incelebris memoria est, scire potuisti. Quos nihil aliud
in cladem detraxit nisi quod nostris moribus instituti studiis improborum
dissimillimi uidebantur. Itaque nihil est quod admirere, si in hoc uitae
salo circumflantibus agitemur procellis, quibus hoc maxime propositum est
pessimis displicere. Quorum quidem tametsi est numerosus exercitus,
spernendus tamen est, quoniam nullo duce regitur, sed errore tantum temere
ac passim lymphante raptatur. Qui si quando contra nos aciem struens
ualentior incubuerit, nostra quidem dux copias suas in arcem contrahit,
illi uero circa diripiendas inutiles sarcinulas occupantur. At nos desuper
inridemus uilissima rerum quaeque rapientes securi totius furiosi tumultus
eoque uallo muniti quo grassanti stultitiae adspirare fas non sit.




  III.

  In like manner, the mists of sadness dissolved, I came to myself and
  recovered my judgment, so that I knew my Physician's face; wherefore
  casting mine eyes upon her somewhat stedfastly, I beheld my nurse
  Philosophy, in whose house I had remained from my youth, and I said: "O
  Mistress of all virtues, for what cause art thou come from heaven into
  this our solitary banishment? Art thou come to bear me company in being
  falsely accused?"

  "Should I," saith she, "forsake thee, my disciple, and not divide the
  burden, which thou bearest through hatred of my name, by partaking of
  thy labour? But Philosophy never thought it lawful to forsake the
  innocent in his trouble. Should I fear any accusations, as though this
  were any new matter? For dost thou think that this is the first time
  that Wisdom hath been exposed to danger by wicked men? Have we not in
  ancient times before our Plato's age had oftentimes great conflicts with
  the rashness of folly? And while he lived, had not his master Socrates
  the victory of an unjust death in my presence, whose inheritance, when
  afterward the mob of Epicures, Stoics, and others (every one for his own
  sect) endeavoured to usurp, and as it were in part of their prey, sought
  to draw me to them, exclaiming and striving against them; they tore the
  garment which I had woven with my own hands, and having gotten some
  little pieces of it, thinking me to be wholly in their possession,
  departed. Some of whom, because certain signs of my apparel appeared
  upon them, were rashly supposed to be my familiar friends, and condemned
  accordingly through the error of the profane multitude.

  But if thou hast not heard of the flight of Anaxagoras, the poison of
  Socrates, nor the torments of Zeno, because they are foreign examples;
  yet thou mayst have heard of Canius, of Seneca, of Soranus,[ ] whose
  memory is both fresh and famous, whom nothing else brought to their
  overthrow but that they had been instructed in our school and were
  altogether disliking to the humours of wicked men; wherefore thou hast
  no cause to marvel, if in the sea of this life we be tossed with
  boisterous storms, whose chiefest purpose is to displease the wicked; of
  which though there be an huge army, yet it is to be despised, because it
  is not governed by any captain, but is carried up and down by
  fantastical error without any order at all. And if at any time they
  assail us with great force, our captain retireth her band into a
  castle,[ ] leaving them occupied in sacking unprofitable baggage. And
  from above we laugh them to scorn for seeking so greedily after most
  vile things, being safe from all their furious assault, and fortified
  with that defence which aspiring folly cannot prevail against.


  [ ] On Julius Kanius or Canius the Stoic cf. Seneca, _De Tranq._ xiv.
   - ; on Soranus cf. Tac. _Annal._ i.  .

  [ ] Cf. _arce religionis nostrae, Tr._ iv. (_supra_, p.  ).




IV.

Quisquis composito serenus aeuo
Fatum sub pedibus egit[ ] superbum
Fortunamque tuens utramque rectus
Inuictum potuit tenere uultum,
Non illum rabies minaeque ponti                                            
Versum funditus exagitantis aestum
Nec ruptis quotiens uagus caminis
Torquet fumificos Vesaeuus ignes
Aut celsas soliti ferire turres
Ardentis uia fulminis mouebit.                                            
Quid tantum miseri saeuos tyrannos
Mirantur sine uiribus furentes?
Nec speres aliquid nec extimescas,
Exarmaueris impotentis iram.
At quisquis trepidus pauet uel optat,                                     
Quod non sit stabilis suique iuris,
Abiecit clipeum locoque motus
Nectit qua ualeat trahi catenam.


[ ] _Fortasse_ iecit; cf. Verg. _Georg._ ii.   _sq._




  IV.

  Who mildly can his age dispose,
  And at his feet proud destiny throws:
  Who stoutly doth each chance behold,
  Keeping his countenance uncontrolled:
  Not him the ocean's rage and threat,
  Stirring the waves with angry heat,
  Nor hot Vesuvius when he casts
  From broken hills enflaméd blasts,
  Nor fiery thunder can dismay,
  Which takes the tops of towers away.
  Why do fierce tyrants us affright,
  Whose rage is far beyond their might?
  For nothing hope, nor fear thou harm,
  So their weak wrath thou shalt disarm.
  But he whom hope or terror takes,
  Being a slave, his shield forsakes,
  And leaves his place, and doth provide
  A chain wherewith his hands are tied.




IV.

"Sentisne," inquit, "haec atque animo inlabuntur tuo, an [Greek: onos
luras]? Quid fles, quid lacrimis manas?

[Greek: Exauda, mae keuthe nooi.]

Si operam medicantis exspectas, oportet uulnus detegas."

Tum ego collecto in uires animo: "Anne adhuc eget admonitione nec per se
satis eminet fortunae in nos saeuientis asperitas? Nihilne te ipsa loci
facies mouet? Haecine est bibliotheca, quam certissimam tibi sedem nostris
in laribus ipsa delegeras? In qua mecum saepe residens de humanarum
diuinarumque rerum scientia disserebas? Talis habitus talisque uultus erat,
*cum tecum naturae secreta rimarer, cum mihi siderum uias radio
describeres, cum mores nostros totiusque uitae rationem ad caelestis
ordinis exempla formares? Haecine praemia referimus tibi obsequentes? Atqui
tu hanc sententiam Platonis ore sanxisti: beatas fore res publicas, si eas
uel studiosi sapientiae regerent uel earum rectores studere sapientiae
contigisset. Tu eiusdem uiri ore hanc sapientibus capessendae rei publicae
necessariam causam esse monuisti, ne improbis flagitiosisque ciuibus urbium
relicta gubernacula pestem bonis ac perniciem ferrent.

Hanc igitur auctoritatem secutus quod a te inter secreta otia didiceram
transferre in actum publicae administrationis optaui. Tu mihi et qui te
sapientium mentibus inseruit deus conscii nullum me ad magistratum nisi
commune bonorum omnium studium detulisse. Inde cum inprobis graues
inexorabilesque discordiae et quod conscientiae libertas habet, pro tuendo
iure spreta potentiorum semper offensio.

Quotiens ego Conigastum in inbecilli cuiusque fortunas impetum facientem
obuius excepi, quotiens Triguillam regiae praepositum domus ab incepta,
perpetrata iam prorsus iniuria deieci, quotiens miseros quos infinitis
calumniis inpunita barbarorum semper auaritia uexabat, obiecta periculis
auctoritate protexi! Numquam me ab iure ad iniuriam quisquam detraxit.
Prouincialium fortunas tum priuatis rapinis tum publicis uectigalibus
pessumdari non aliter quam qui patiebantur indolui.

Cum acerbae famis tempore grauis atque inexplicabilis indicta coemptio
profligatura inopia Campaniam prouinciam uideretur, certamen aduersum
praefectum praetorii communis commodi ratione suscepi, rege cognoscente
contendi et ne coemptio exigeretur, euici. Paulinum consularem uirum cuius
opes Palatinae canes iam spe atque ambitione deuorassent, ab ipsis hiantium
faucibus traxi. Ne Albinum consularem uirum praeiudicatae accusationis
poena corriperet, odiis me Cypriani delatoris opposui. Satisne in me magnas
uideor exaceruasse discordias? Sed esse apud ceteros tutior debui qui mihi
amore iustitiae nihil apud aulicos quo magis essem tutior reseruaui. Quibus
autem deferentibus perculsi sumus? Quorum Basilius olim regio ministerio
depulsus in delationem nostri nominis alieni aeris necessitate compulsus
est. Opilionem uero atque Gaudentium cum ob innumeras multiplicesque
fraudes ire in exilium regia censura decreuisset cumque illi parere
nolentes sacrarum sese aedium defensione tuerentur compertumque id regi
foret, edixit: uti ni intra praescriptum diem Rauenna urbe decederent,
notas insigniti frontibus pellerentur. Quid huic seueritati posse astrui
uidetur? Atqui in eo die deferentibus eisdem nominis nostri delatio
suscepta est. Quid igitur? Nostraene artes ita meruerunt? An illos
accusatores iustos fecit praemissa damnatio? Itane nihil fortunam puduit si
minus accusatae innocentiae, at accusantium uilitatis?[ ] At cuius
criminis arguimur summam quaeris? Senatum dicimur saluum esse uoluisse.
Modum desideras? Delatorem ne documenta deferret quibus senatum maiestatis
reum faceret impedisse criminamur.

Quid igitur o magistra censes? Infitiabimur crimen, ne tibi pudor simus? At
uolui nec umquam uelle desistam. Fatebimur? Sed impediendi delatoris opera
cessauit. An optasse illius ordinis salutem nefas uocabo? Ille quidem suis
de me decretis, uti hoc nefas esset, effecerat. Sed sibi semper mentiens
inprudentia rerum merita non potest inmutare nec mihi Socratico decreto fas
esse arbitror uel occuluisse ueritatem uel concessisse mendacium. Verum id
quoquo modo sit, tuo sapientiumque iudicio aestimandum relinquo. Cuius rei
seriem atque ueritatem, ne latere posteros queat, stilo etiam memoriaeque
mandaui.

Nam de compositis falso litteris quibus libertatem arguor sperasse Romanam
quid attinet dicere? Quarum fraus aperta patuisset, si nobis ipsorum
confessione delatorum, quod in omnibus negotiis maximas uires habet, uti
licuisset. Nam quae sperari reliqua libertas potest? Atque utinam posset
ulla! Respondissem Canii uerbo, qui cum a Gaio Caesare Germanici filio
conscius contra se factae coniurationis fuisse diceretur: 'Si ego,' inquit,
'scissem, tu nescisses.' Qua in re non ita sensus nostros maeror hebetauit
ut impios scelerata contra uirtutem querar molitos, sed quae sperauerint
effecisse uehementer admiror. Nam deteriora uelle nostri fuerit fortasse
defectus, posse contra innocentiam, quae sceleratus quisque conceperit
inspectante deo, monstri simile est. Vnde haud iniuria tuorum quidam
familiarium quaesiuit: 'Si quidem deus,' inquit, 'est, unde mala? Bona uero
unde, si non est?' Sed fas fuerit nefarios homines qui bonorum omnium
totiusque senatus sanguinem petunt, nos etiam quos propugnare bonis
senatuique uiderant, perditum ire uoluisse. Sed num idem de patribus quoque
merebamur? Meministi, ut opinor, quoniam me dicturum quid facturumue
praesens semper ipsa dirigebas, meministi, inquam, Veronae cum rex auidus
exitii communis maiestatis crimen in Albinum delatae ad cunctum senatus
ordinem transferre moliretur, uniuersi innocentiam senatus quanta mei
periculi securitate defenderim. Scis me haec et uera proferre et in nulla
umquam mei laude iactasse. Minuit enim quodam modo se probantis
conscientiae secretum, quotiens ostentando quis factum recipit famae
pretium. Sed innocentiam nostram quis exceperit euentus uides; pro uerae
uirtutis praemiis falsi sceleris poenas subimus. Et cuius umquam facinoris
manifesta confessio ita iudices habuit in seueritate concordes ut non
aliquos uel ipse ingenii error humani uel fortunae condicio cunctis
mortalibus incerta submitteret? Si inflammare sacras aedes uoluisse, si
sacerdotes impio iugulare gladio, si bonis omnibus necem struxisse
diceremur, praesentem tamen sententia, confessum tamen conuictumue
punisset. Nunc quingentis fere passuum milibus procul muti atque indefensi
ob studium propensius in senatum morti proscriptionique damnamur. O meritos
de simili crimine neminem posse conuinci!

Cuius dignitatem reatus ipsi etiam qui detulere uiderunt, quam uti alicuius
sceleris admixtione fuscarent, ob ambitum dignitatis sacrilegio me
conscientiam polluisse mentiti sunt. Atqui et tu insita nobis omnem rerum
mortalium cupidinem de nostri animi sede pellebas et sub tuis oculis
sacrilegio locum esse fas non erat. Instillabas enim auribus
cogitationibusque cotidie meis Pythagoricum illud [Greek: hepou theoi].[ ]
Nec conueniebat uilissimorum me spirituum praesidia captare quem tu in hanc
excellentiam componebas ut consimilem deo faceres. Praeterea penetral
innocens domus, honestissimorum coetus amicorum, socer etiam sanctus et
aeque ac tu ipsa[ ] reuerendus ab omni nos huius criminis suspitione
defendunt. Sed, o nefas, illi uero de te tanti criminis fidem capiunt atque
hoc ipso uidebimur affines fuisse maleficio, quod tuis inbuti disciplinis,
tuis instituti moribus sumus. Ita non est satis nihil mihi tuam profuisse
reuerentiam, nisi ultro tu mea potius offensione lacereris. At uero hic
etiam nostris malis cumulus accedit, quod existimatio plurimorum non rerum
merita sed fortunae spectat euentum eaque tantum iudicat esse prouisa quae
felicitas commendauerit. Quo fit ut existimatio bona prima omnium deserat
infelices. Qui nunc populi rumores, quam dissonae multiplicesque
sententiae, piget reminisci. Hoc tantum dixerim ultimam esse aduersae
fortunae sarcinam, quod dum miseris aliquod crimen affingitur, quae
perferunt meruisse creduntur. Et ego quidem bonis omnibus pulsus,
dignitatibus exutus, existimatione foedatus ob beneficium supplicium tuli.

Videre autem uideor nefarias sceleratorum officinas gaudio laetitiaque
fluitantes, perditissimum quemque nouis delationum fraudibus imminentem,
iacere bonos nostri discriminis terrore prostratos, flagitiosum quemque ad
audendum quidem facinus impunitate, ad efficiendum uero praemiis incitari,
insontes autem non modo securitate, uerum ipsa etiam defensione priuatos.
Itaque libet exclamare:


[ ] uilitatis _Glareanus_; uilitas _codd._

[ ] [Greek: theon] _codd._

[ ] ipsa _Sitzmannus_; ipso _codd._




  IV.

  "Understandest thou these things," saith she, "and do they make
  impression in thy mind? Art thou 'like the ass, deaf to the lyre'? Why
  weepest thou? Why sheddest thou so many tears? Speak out; hide not thy
  thoughts.[ ] If thou expectest to be cured, thou must discover thy
  wound.[ ]"

  Then I, collecting the forces of my mind together, made her answer in
  these words: "Doth the cruelty of fortune's rage need further
  declaration, or doth it not sufficiently appear of itself? Doth not the
  very countenance of this place move thee? Is this the library which thou
  thyself hadst chosen to sit in at my house, in which thou hast
  oftentimes discoursed with me of the knowledge of divine and human
  things? Had I this attire or countenance when I searched the secrets of
  nature with thee, when thou describedst unto me the course of the stars
  with thy geometrical rod, when thou didst frame my conversation and the
  manner of my whole life according to the pattern of the celestial order?
  Are these the rewards which thy obedient servants have? But thou didst
  decree that sentence by the mouth of Plato: That commonwealths should be
  happy, if either the students of wisdom did govern them, or those which
  were appointed to govern them would give themselves to the study of
  wisdom.[ ] Thou by the same philosopher didst admonish us that it is a
  sufficient cause for wise men to take upon themselves the government of
  the commonwealth, lest, if the rule of cities were left in the hands of
  lewd and wicked citizens, they should work the subversion and overthrow
  of the good.

  Wherefore, following this authority, I desired to practise that by
  public administration which I had learnt of thee in private conference.
  Thou and God Himself who had inserted thee in the minds of the wise, are
  my witnesses that nothing but the common desire of all good men brought
  me to be a magistrate. This hath been the cause of my grievous and
  irreconcilable disagreements with wicked men, and that which freedom of
  conscience carrieth with it, of ever contemning the indignation of
  potentates for the defence of justice.

  How often have I encountered with Conigastus, violently possessing
  himself with poor men's goods? How often have I put back Triguilla,
  Provost of the King's house, from injuries which he had begun, yea, and
  finished also? How often have I protected, by putting my authority in
  danger, such poor wretches as the unpunished covetousness of the
  barbarous did vex with infinite reproaches? Never did any man draw me
  from right to wrong. It grieved me no less than them which suffered it,
  to see the wealth of our subjects wasted, partly by private pillage, and
  partly by public tributes.

  When in the time of a great dearth things were set at so excessive and
  unreasonable a rate that the province of Campania was like to be
  altogether impoverished, for the common good I stuck not to contend with
  the chief Praetor himself, and the matter was discussed before the King,
  and I prevailed so far that it went not forward. I drew Paulinus, who
  had been Consul, out of the very mouth of the gaping courtiers, who like
  ravenous curs had already in hope and ambition devoured his riches. That
  Albinus who had likewise been Consul might not be punished upon
  presumptuous[ ] and false accusation, I exposed myself to the hatred of
  Cyprian his accuser. May I seem to have provoked enmity enough against
  myself? But others should so much the more have procured my safety,
  since that for the love I bear to justice I left myself no way by the
  means of courtiers to be safe. But by whose accusations did I receive
  this blow? By theirs who, long since having put Basil out of the King's
  service, compelled him now to accuse me, by the necessity which he was
  driven to by debt. Opilio likewise and Gaudentius being banished by the
  King's decree, for the injuries and manifold deceits which they had
  committed, because they would not obey, defended themselves by taking
  sanctuary, of which the King hearing, gave sentence, that unless they
  departed out of the city of Ravenna within certain days, they should be
  branded in the foreheads, and put out by force. What could be added to
  this severity? And yet that very day their accusations against me went
  for current. What might be the reason of this? Did my dealing deserve
  it? Or did the condemnation, which went before, make them just accusers?
  Was not fortune ashamed, if not that innocency was accused, yet at least
  that it had so vile and base accusers? But what crime was laid to my
  charge? Wilt thou have it in one word? I am said to have desired the
  Senate's safety. Wilt thou know the manner how? I am blamed for having
  hindered their accuser to bring forth evidence by which he should prove
  the Senate guilty of treason.

  What thinkest thou, O Mistress? Shall I deny this charge, that I may not
  shame thee? But it is true, I desired it, neither will I ever cease from
  having that desire. Shall I confess it? But I have already left
  hindering their accuser. Shall I call it an offence to have wished the
  safety of that order? Indeed the Senate with their decrees concerning me
  had made it an offence. But folly, always deceiving herself, cannot
  change the deserts of things, nor, according to the decree of
  Socrates,[ ] do I think it is lawful either to conceal the truth or
  grant a lie. But how this may be, I leave to thine and Wisdom's censure.
  And that posterity may not be ignorant of the course and truth of the
  matter, I have put it down in writing.

  For why should I speak of those feigned letters, in which I am charged
  to have hoped for Roman liberty? The deceit of which would manifestly
  have appeared, if it might have been lawful for me to have used the
  confession of my very accusers, which in all business is of greatest
  force. For what liberty remaineth there to be hoped for? I would to God
  there were any! I would have answered as Canius did, who being charged
  by Gaius Caesar, son to Germanicus, that he was privy to the conspiracy
  made against him, answered: 'If I had been made acquainted with it, thou
  shouldest never have known of it.'[ ] Neither hath sorrow so dulled my
  wits in this matter that I complain of the wicked endeavours of sinful
  men against virtue, but I exceedingly marvel to see that they have
  brought to pass the things they hoped to do. For the desire of doing
  evil may be attributed to our weakness, but that in the sight of God the
  wicked should be able to compass whatsoever they contrive against the
  innocent, is altogether monstrous. Whence not without cause one of thy
  familiar friends[ ] demanded: 'If,' saith he, 'there be a God, from
  whence proceed so many evils? And if there be no God, from whence cometh
  any good?' But let that pass that wicked men, which seek the blood of
  all good men, and of the whole Senate, would also have overthrown me,
  whom they saw to stand in defence of good men and of the Senate. But did
  I deserve the same of the Senators themselves? I suppose thou
  rememberest how thou being present didst alway direct me when I went
  about to say or do anything. Thou rememberest, I say, when at Verona the
  King, being desirous of a common overthrow, endeavoured to lay the
  treason, whereof only Albinus was accused, upon the whole order of the
  Senate, with how great security of my own danger I defended the
  innocency of the whole Senate. Thou knowest that these things which I
  say are true, and that I was never delighted in my own praise, for the
  secret of a good conscience is in some sort diminished when by declaring
  what he hath done a man receiveth the reward of fame. But thou seest to
  what pass my innocency is come; instead of the rewards of true virtue, I
  undergo the punishment of wickedness, wherewith I am falsely charged.
  Was it ever yet seen that the manifest confession of any crime made the
  judges so at one in severity, that either the error of man's judgment or
  the condition of fortune, which is certain to none, did not incline some
  of them to favour? If I had been accused that I would have burnt the
  churches, or wickedly have killed the priests, or have sought the death
  of all good men, yet sentence should have been pronounced against me
  present, having confessed, and being convicted. Now being conveyed five
  hundred miles off, dumb and defenceless, I am condemned to death and
  proscription for bearing the Senate too much good will. O Senate, which
  deserves that never any may be convicted of the like crime!

  The dignity of which accusation even the very accusers themselves saw,
  which that they might obscure by adding some sort of fault, they belied
  me that I defiled my conscience with sacrilege, for an ambitious desire
  of preferment. But thou, which hadst seated thyself in me, didst repel
  from the seat of my mind all desire of mortal things, and within thy
  sight there was no place for sacrilege to harbour; for thou didst instil
  into my ears and thoughts daily that saying of Pythagoras, 'Follow
  God.'[ ] Neither was it fitting for me to use the aid of most vile
  spirits when thou wast shaping me into that excellency to make me like
  to God. Besides the innocency which appeared in the most retired rooms
  of my house, the assembly of my most honourable friends, my holy father-
  in-law Symmachus, who is as worthy of reverence as thou thyself art, do
  clear me from all suspicion of this crime. But O detestable wickedness!
  they the rather credit thee with so great a crime, and think me the
  nigher to such mischievous dealing, because I am endued with thy
  knowledge, and adorned with thy virtues, so that it is not enough that I
  reap no commodity for thy respect, unless thou beest also dishonoured
  for the hatred conceived against me. And that my miseries may increase
  the more, the greatest part do not so much respect the value of things
  as the event of fortune, and they esteem only that to be providently
  done which the happy success commends. By which means it cometh to pass
  that the first loss which miserable men have is their estimation and the
  good opinion which was had of them. What rumours go now among the
  people, what dissonant and diverse opinions! I cannot abide to think of
  them; only this will I say, the last burden of adversity is that when
  they which are in misery are accused of any crime, they are thought to
  deserve whatsoever they suffer. And I, spoiled of all my goods, bereaved
  of my dignities, blemished in my good name, for benefits receive
  punishments.

  And methinks I see the cursed crews of the wicked abounding with joy and
  gladness, and every lost companion devising with himself how to accuse
  others falsely, good men lie prostrate with the terror of my danger, and
  every lewd fellow is provoked by impunity to attempt any wickedness, and
  by rewards to bring it to effect; but the innocent are not only deprived
  of all security, but also of any manner of defence. Wherefore I may well
  exclaim:


  [ ] Homer, _Il._ i.  .

  [ ] Cf. _Tr._ v. (_supra_, p.  ), _quasi non deterior fiat
  inscientiae causa dum tegitur._

  [ ] Plato, _Rep._ v.  .

  [ ] Presumptuous=founded on presumption.

  [ ] Cp. Plato, _Rep._ vi.  ; the [Greek: philosophos] cannot be
  [Greek: philopseudaes.]

  [ ] _Vide supra_, p.  . This seems to be the only record of Canius's
  retort to Caligula.

  [ ] i.e. Epicurus, cp. Lact. _De Ira Dei_ xiii.

  [ ] Cf. [Greek: ho bios apas suntetaktai pros to akolouthein toi
  Theoi], Iambl. _De Vita Pyth._ xviii., and Seneca, _De Vita Beata_ xv.




V.

O stelliferi conditor orbis
Qui perpetuo nixus solio
Rapido caelum turbine uersas
Legemque pati sidera cogis,
Vt nunc pleno lucida cornu                                                 
Totis fratris obuia flammis
Condat stellas luna minores,
Nunc obscuro pallida cornu
Phoebo propior lumina perdat,
Et qui primae tempore noctis                                              
Agit algentes Hesperos ortus,
Solitas iterum mutet habenas
Phoebi pallens Lucifer ortu.
Tu frondifluae frigore brumae
Stringis lucem breuiore mora:                                             
Tu, cum feruida uenerit aestas,
Agiles nocti diuidis horas.
Tua uis uarium temperat annum
Vt quas Boreae spiritus aufert
Reuehat mites Zephyrus frondes                                            
Quaeque Arcturus semina uidit
Sirius altas urat segetes.
Nihil antiqua lege solutum
Linquit propriae stationis opus.
Omnia certo fine gubernans                                                
Hominum solos respuis actus
Merito rector cohibere modo.
Nam cur tantas lubrica uersat
Fortuna uices? Premit insontes
Debita sceleri noxia poena,                                               
At peruersi resident celso
Mores solio sanctaque calcant
Iniusta uice colla nocentes.
Latet obscuris condita uirtus
Clara tenebris iustusque tulit                                            
Crimen iniqui.
Nil periuria, nil nocet ipsis
Fraus mendaci compta colore.
Sed cum libuit uiribus uti,
Quos innumeri metuunt populi                                              
Summos gaudent subdere reges.
O iam miseras respice terras
Quisquis rerum foedera nectis.
Operis tanti pars non uilis
Homines quatimur fortunae salo.                                           
Rapidos rector comprime fluctus
Et quo caelum regis immensum
Firma stabiles foedere terras."




V.

    Creator of the Sky,
  Who sittest on Thine eternal throne on high,
    Who dost quick motions cause
  In all the heavens, and givest stars their laws,
    That the pale Queen of Night,
  Sometimes receiving all her brother's light,
    Should shine in her full pride,
  And with her beams the lesser stars should hide;
    Sometimes she wants her grace,
  When the sun's rays are in less distant place;
    And Hesperus that flies,
  Driving the cold, before the night doth rise,
    And oft with sudden change
  Before the sun as Lucifer doth range.[ ]
    Thou short the days dost make,
  When Winter from the trees the leaves doth take;
    Thou, when the fiery sun
  Doth Summer cause, makest the nights swiftly run.
    Thy might doth rule the year,
  As northern winds the leaves away do bear,
    So Zephyrus from west
  The plants in all their freshness doth revest;
    And Syrius burns that corn
  With which Arcturus did the earth adorn.
    None from Thy laws are free,
  Nor can forsake their place ordained by Thee.
    Thou to that certain end
  Governest all things; deniest Thou to intend
    The acts of men alone,
  Directing them in measure from Thy throne?
    For why should slippery chance
  Rule all things with such doubtful governance?
    Or why should punishments,
  Due to the guilty, light on innocents?
    But now the highest place
  Giveth to naughty manners greatest grace,
    And wicked people vex
  Good men, and tread unjustly on their necks;
    Virtue in darkness lurks,
  And righteous souls are charged with impious works,
    Deceits nor perjuries
  Disgrace not those who colour them with lies,
    For, when it doth them please
  To show their force, they to their will with ease
    The hearts of kings can steer,
  To whom so many crouch with trembling fear.
    O Thou that joinest with love
  All worldly things, look from Thy seat above
    On the earth's wretched state;
  We men, not the least work thou didst create,
    With fortune's blasts do shake;
  Thou careful ruler, these fierce tempests slake,
    And for the earth provide
  Those laws by which Thou heaven in peace dost guide."


  [ ] Literally, "And that he who as Hesperus, in the early hours of the
  night, drives the cold stars before him, should change chariot (lit. his
  accustomed reins) and become Lucifer, growing pale in the first rays of
  the sun."




V.

Haec ubi continuato dolore delatraui, illa uultu placido nihilque meis
questibus mota: "Cum te," inquit, "maestum lacrimantemque uidissem, ilico
miserum exsulemque cognoui. Sed quam id longinquum esset exilium, nisi tua
prodidisset oratio, nesciebam. Sed tu quam procul a patria non quidem
pulsus es sed aberrasti; ac si te pulsum existimari mauis, te potius ipse
pepulisti. Nam id quidem de te numquam cuiquam fas fuisset. Si enim cuius
oriundo sis patriae reminiscare, non uti Atheniensium quondam multitudinis
imperio regitur, sed

[Greek: heis koiranos estin, heis basileus]

qui frequentia ciuium non depulsione laetetur; cuius agi frenis atque
obtemperare iustitiae summa libertas est. An ignoras illam tuae ciuitatis
antiquissimam legem, qua sanctum est ei ius exulare non esse quisquis in ea
sedem fundare maluerit? Nam qui uallo eius ac munimine continetur, nullus
metus est ne exul esse mereatur. At quisquis eam inhabitare uelle desierit,
pariter desinit etiam mereri. Itaque non tam me loci huius quam tua facies
mouet nec bibliothecae potius comptos ebore ac uitro parietes quam tuae
mentis sedem requiro, in qua non libros sed id quod libris pretium facit,
librorum quondam meorum sententias, collocaui. Et tu quidem de tuis in
commune bonum meritis uera quidem, sed pro multitudine gestorum tibi pauca
dixisti. De obiectorum tibi uel honestate uel falsitate cunctis nota
memorasti. De sceleribus fraudibusque delatorum recte tu quidem strictim
attingendum putasti, quod ea melius uberiusque recognoscentis omnia uulgi
ore celebrentur. Increpuisti etiam uehementer iniusti factum senatus. De
nostra etiam criminatione doluisti, laesae quoque opinionis damna fleuisti.
Postremus aduersum fortunam dolor incanduit conquestusque non aequa meritis
praemia pensari. In extremo Musae saeuientis, uti quae caelum terras quoque
pax regeret, uota posuisti. Sed quoniam plurimus tibi affectuum tumultus
incubuit diuersumque te dolor, ira, maeror distrahunt, uti nunc mentis es,
nondum te ualidiora remedia contingunt. Itaque lenioribus paulisper utemur,
ut quae in tumorem perturbationibus influentibus induruerunt, ad acrioris
uim medicaminis recipiendum tactu blandiore mollescant.




  V.

  When I had uttered these speeches with continued grief, she, with an
  amiable countenance and nothing moved with my complaints, said: "When I
  first saw thee sad and weeping, I forthwith knew thee to be in misery
  and banishment. But I had not known how far off thou wert banished, if
  thy speech had not bewrayed it. O how far art thou gone from thy
  country, not being driven away, but wandering of thine own accord! Or if
  thou hadst rather be thought to have been driven out, it hath been only
  by thyself; for never could any other but thyself have done it; for if
  thou rememberest of what country thou art, it is not governed as Athens
  was wont to be, by the multitude, but 'one is its ruler, one its
  king,'[ ] who desires to have abundance of citizens, and not to have
  them driven away. To be governed by whose authority, and to be subject
  to her laws, is the greatest freedom that can be. Art thou ignorant of
  that most ancient law of thy city, by which it is decreed that he may
  not be banished that hath made choice of it for his dwelling-place;[ ]
  for he that is within her fort or hold need not fear lest he deserve to
  be banished? But whosoever ceaseth to desire to dwell in it, ceaseth
  likewise to deserve so great a benefit. Wherefore the countenance of
  this place moveth me not so much as thy countenance doth. Neither do I
  much require thy library adorned with ivory adornments, and its crystal
  walls, as the seat of thy mind, in which I have not placed books, but
  that which makes books to be esteemed of, I mean the sentences of my
  books, which were written long since. And that which thou hast said of
  thy deserts to the common good, is true indeed, but little in respect of
  the many things which thou hast done. That which thou hast reported,
  either of the honesty or of the falseness of those things which are
  objected against thee, is known to all men. Thou didst well to touch but
  briefly the wickedness and deceit of thy accusers, for that the common
  people to whose notice they are come do more fitly and largely speak of
  them. Thou hast also sharply rebuked the unjust Senate's deed. Thou hast
  also grieved at our accusation, and hast bewailed the loss or
  diminishing of our good name; and lastly, thy sorrow raged against
  fortune, and thou complainedst that deserts were not equally rewarded.
  In the end of thy bitter verse, thou desiredst that the earth might be
  governed by that peace which heaven enjoyeth. But because thou art
  turmoiled with the multitude of affections, grief and anger drawing thee
  to divers parts, in the plight thou art now, the more forcible remedies
  cannot be applied unto thee; wherefore, for a while, we will use the
  more easy, that thy affections, which are, as it were, hardened and
  swollen with perturbations, may by gentle handling be mollified and
  disposed to receive the force of sharper medicines.


  [ ] Hom. _Il._ ii.  .

  [ ] Cf. Cicero, _Pro domo sua_.  .  .




VI.

Cum Phoebi radiis graue
Cancri sidus inaestuat,
Tum qui larga negantibus
Sulcis semina credidit,
Elusus Cereris fide                                                        
Quernas pergat ad arbores.
Numquam purpureum nemus
Lecturus uiolas petas
Cum saeuis aquilonibus
Stridens campus inhorruit,                                                
Nec quaeras auida manu
Vernos stringere palmites,
Vuis si libeat frui;
Autumno potius sua
Bacchus munera contulit.                                                  
Signat tempora propriis
Aptans officiis deus
Nec quas ipse coercuit
Misceri patitur uices.
Sic quod praecipiti uia                                                   
Certum deserit ordinem
Laetos non habet exitus.




  VI.

  When hot with Phoebus' beams
  The Crab casts fiery gleams,
  He that doth then with seed
  Th'unwilling furrows feed,
  Deceivéd of his bread
  Must be with acorns fed.
  Seek not the flowery woods
  For violets' sweet buds,
  When fields are overcast
  With the fierce northern blast,
  Nor hope thou home to bring
  Vine-clusters in the Spring
  If thou in grapes delight:
  In autumn Bacchus' might
  With them doth deck our clime.
  God every several time
  With proper grace hath crowned
  Nor will those laws confound
  Which He once settled hath.
  He that with headlong path
  This certain order leaves,
  An hapless end receives.




VI.

Primum igitur paterisne me pauculis rogationibus statum tuae mentis
attingere atque temptare, ut qui modus sit tuae curationis intellegam?" "Tu
uero arbitratu," inquam, "tuo quae uoles ut responsurum rogato." Tum illa:
"Huncine," inquit, "mundum temerariis agi fortuitisque casibus putas, an
ullum credis ei regimen inesse rationis?" "Atqui," inquam, "nullo
existimauerim modo ut fortuita temeritate tam certa moueantur, uerum operi
suo conditorem praesidere deum scio nec umquam fuerit dies qui me ab hac
sententiae ueritate depellat."

"Ita est," inquit. "Nam id etiam paulo ante cecinisti, hominesque tantum
diuinae exortes curae esse deplorasti. Nam de ceteris quin ratione
regerentur, nihil mouebare. Papae autem! Vehementer admiror cur in tam
salubri sententia locatus aegrotes. Verum altius perscrutemur; nescio quid
abesse coniecto.

"Sed dic mihi, quoniam deo mundum regi non ambigis, quibus etiam
gubernaculis regatur aduertis?" "Vix," inquam, "rogationis tuae sententiam
nosco, nedum ad inquisita respondere queam." "Num me," inquit, "fefellit
abesse aliquid, per quod, uelut hiante ualli robore, in animum tuum
perturbationum morbus inrepserit? Sed dic mihi, meministine, quis sit rerum
finis, quoue totius naturae tendat intentio?" "Audieram," inquam, "sed
memoriam maeror hebetauit." "Atqui scis unde cuncta processerint?" "Noui,"
inquam, deumque esse respondi. "Et qui fieri potest, ut principio cognito
quis sit rerum finis ignores? Verum hi perturbationum mores, ea ualentia
est, ut mouere quidem loco hominem possint, conuellere autem sibique totum
exstirpare non possint.

Sed hoc quoque respondeas uelim, hominemne te esse meministi?" "Quidni,"
inquam, "meminerim?" "Quid igitur homo sit, poterisne proferre?" "Hocine
interrogas an esse me sciam rationale animal atque mortale? Scio et id me
esse confiteor." Et illa: "Nihilne aliud te esse nouisti?" "Nihil."

"Iam scio," inquit, "morbi tui aliam uel maximam causam; quid ipse sis,
nosse desisti. Quare plenissime uel aegritudinis tuae rationem uel aditum
reconciliandae sospitatis inueni. Nam quoniam tui obliuione confunderis, et
exsulem te et exspoliatum propriis bonis esse doluisti. Quoniam uero quis
sit rerum finis ignoras, nequam homines atque nefarios potentes felicesque
arbitraris. Quoniam uero quibus gubernaculis mundus regatur oblitus es, has
fortunarum uices aestimas sine rectore fluitare--magnae non ad morbum modo
uerum ad interitum quoque causae. Sed sospitatis auctori grates, quod te
nondum totum natura destituit. Habemus maximum tuae fomitem salutis ueram
de mundi gubernatione sententiam, quod eam non casuum temeritati sed
diuinae rationi subditam credis. Nihil igitur pertimescas; iam tibi ex hac
minima scintillula uitalis calor inluxerit. Sed quoniam firmioribus
remediis nondum tempus est et eam mentium constat esse naturam, ut quotiens
abiecerint ueras falsis opinionibus induantur ex quibus orta perturbationum
caligo uerum illum confundit intuitum, hanc paulisper lenibus
mediocribusque fomentis attenuare temptabo, ut dimotis fallacium
affectionum tenebris splendorem uerae lucis possis agnoscere.




  VI.

  First, therefore, wilt thou let me touch and try the state of thy mind
  by asking thee a few questions, that I may understand how thou art to be
  cured?" To which I answered: "Ask me what questions thou wilt, and I
  will answer thee." And then she said: "Thinkest thou that this world is
  governed by haphazard and chance? Or rather dost thou believe that it is
  ruled by reason?" "I can," quoth I, "in no manner imagine that such
  certain motions are caused by rash chance. And I know that God the
  Creator doth govern His work, nor shall the day ever come to draw me
  from the truth of that judgment."

  "It is so," saith she, "for so thou saidst in thy verse a little before,
  and bewailedst that only men were void of God's care; for as for the
  rest, thou didst not doubt but that they were governed by reason. And
  surely I cannot choose but exceedingly admire how thou canst be ill
  affected, holding so wholesome an opinion. But let us search further; I
  guess thou wantest something, but I know not what.

  Tell me, since thou doubtest not that the world is governed by God,
  canst thou tell me also by what means it is governed?" "I do scarcely,"
  quoth I, "understand what thou askest, and much less am I able to make
  thee a sufficient answer." "Was I," quoth she, "deceived in thinking
  that thou wantedst something by which, as by the breach of a fortress,
  the sickness of perturbations hath entered into thy mind? But tell me,
  dost thou remember what is the end of things? Or to what the whole
  intention of nature tendeth?" "I have heard it," quoth I, "but grief
  hath dulled my memory." "But knowest thou from whence all things had
  their beginning?" "I know," quoth I, and answered, that from God. "And
  how can it be that, knowing the beginning, thou canst be ignorant of the
  end? But this is the condition and force of perturbations, that they may
  alter a man, but wholly destroy, and as it were root him out of himself,
  they cannot.

  But I would have thee answer me to this also; dost thou remember that
  thou art a man?" "Why should I not remember it?" quoth I. "Well then,
  canst thou explicate what man is?" "Dost thou ask me if I know that I am
  a reasonable and mortal living creature? I know and confess myself to be
  so." To which she replied: "Dost thou not know thyself to be anything
  else?" "Not anything."

  "Now I know," quoth she, "another, and that perhaps the greatest, cause
  of thy sickness: thou hast forgotten what thou art. Wherefore I have
  fully found out both the manner of thy disease and the means of thy
  recovery; for the confusion which thou art in, by the forgetfulness of
  thyself, is the cause why thou art so much grieved at thy exile and the
  loss of thy goods. And because thou art ignorant what is the end of
  things, thou thinkest that lewd and wicked men be powerful and happy;
  likewise, because thou hast forgotten by what means the world is
  governed, thou imaginest that these alternations of fortune do fall out
  without any guide, sufficient causes not only of sickness, but also of
  death itself. But thanks be to the author of thy health, that Nature
  hath not altogether forsaken thee. We have the greatest nourisher of thy
  health, the true opinion of the government of the world, in that thou
  believest that it is not subject to the events of chance, but to divine
  reason. Wherefore fear nothing; out of this little sparkle will be
  enkindled thy vital heat. But because it is not yet time to use more
  solid remedies, and it is manifest that the nature of minds is such that
  as often as they cast away true opinions they are possessed with false,
  out of which the darkness of perturbations arising doth make them that
  they cannot discern things aright, I will endeavour to dissolve this
  cloud with gentle and moderate fomentations; that having removed the
  obscurity of deceitful affections, thou mayest behold the splendour of
  true light.




VII.

Nubibus atris
Condita nullum
Fundere possunt
Sidera lumen.
Si mare uoluens                                                            
Turbidus Auster
Misceat aestum,
Vitrea dudum
Parque serenis
Vnda diebus                                                               
Mox resoluto
Sordida caeno
Visibus obstat.
Quique uagatur
Montibus altis                                                            
Defluus amnis,
Saepe resistit
Rupe soluti
Obice saxi.
Tu quoque si uis                                                          
Lumine claro
Cernere uerum,
Tramite recto
Carpere callem,
Gaudia pelle,                                                             
Pelle timorem
Spemque fugato
Nec dolor adsit.
Nubila mens est
Vinctaque frenis,                                                         
Haec ubi regnant."




  VII.

  When stars are shrouded
  With dusky night,
  They yield no light
  Being so clouded.
  When the wind moveth
  And churneth the sea,
  The flood, clear as day,
  Foul and dark proveth.
  And rivers creeping
  Down a high hill
  Stand often still,
  Rocks them back keeping.
  If thou wouldst brightly
  See Truth's clear rays,
  Or walk those ways
  Which lead most rightly,
  All joy forsaking
  Fear must thou fly,
  And hopes defy,
  No sorrow taking.
  For where these terrors
  Reign in the mind,
  They it do bind
  In cloudy errors."






ANICII MANLII SEVERINI BOETHII

V.C. ET INL. EXCONS. ORD. PATRICII

PHILOSOPHIAE CONSOLATIONIS

LIBER PRIMVS EXPLICIT

INCIPIT LIBER II




I.

Post haec paulisper obticuit atque ubi attentionem meam modesta
taciturnitate collegit, sic exorsa est: "Si penitus aegritudinis tuae
causas habitumque cognovi, fortunae prioris affectu desiderioque tabescis.
Ea tantum animi tui sicuti tu tibi fingis mutata peruertit. Intellego
multiformes illius prodigii fucos et eo usque cum his quos eludere nititur
blandissimam familiaritatem, dum intolerabili dolore confundat quos
insperata reliquerit. Cuius si naturam mores ac meritum reminiscare, nec
habuisse te in ea pulchrum aliquid nec amisisse cognosces, sed ut arbitror
haud multum tibi haec in memoriam reuocare laborauerim. Solebas enim
praesentem quoque blandientemque uirilibus incessere uerbis eamque de
nostro adyto prolatis insectabare sententiis. Verum omnis subita mutatio
rerum non sine quodam quasi fluctu contingit animorum; sic factum est ut tu
quoque paulisper a tua tranquillitate descisceres. Sed tempus est haurire
te aliquid ac degustare molle atque iucundum quod ad interiora transmissum
ualidioribus haustibus uiam fecerit. Adsit igitur Rhetoricae suadela
dulcedinis quae tum tantum recto calle procedit, cum nostra instituta non
deserit cumque hac Musica laris nostri uernacula nunc leuiores nunc
grauiores modos succinat.

Quid est igitur o homo quod te in maestitiam luctumque deiecit? Nouum,
credo, aliquid inusitatumque uidisti. Tu fortunam putas erga te esse
mutatam; erras. Hi semper eius mores sunt ista natura. Seruauit circa te
propriam potius in ipsa sui mutabilitate constantiam. Talis erat cum
blandiebatur, cum tibi falsae inlecebris felicitatis alluderet.
Deprehendisti caeci numinis ambiguos uultus. Quae sese adhuc uelat aliis,
tota tibi prorsus innotuit. Si probas, utere moribus; ne queraris. Si
perfidiam perhorrescis, sperne atque abice perniciosa ludentem. Nam quae
nunc tibi est tanti causa maeroris, haec eadem tranquillitatis esse
debuisset, Reliquit enim te quam non relicturam nemo umquam poterit esse
securus. An uero tu pretiosam aestimas abituram felicitatem? Et cara tibi
est fortuna praesens nec manendi fida et cum discesserit adlatura maerorem.
Quod si nec ex arbitrio retineri potest et calamitosos fugiens facit, quid
est aliud fugax quam futurae quoddam calamitatis indicium? Neque enim quod
ante oculos situm est, suffecerit intueri; rerum exitus prudentia metitur
eademque in alterutro mutabilitas nec formidandas fortunae minas nec
exoptandas facit esse blanditias.  Postremo aequo animo toleres oportet
quidquid intra fortunae aream geritur, cum semel iugo eius colla
submiseris. Quod si manendi abeundique scribere legem uelis ei quam tu tibi
dominam sponte legisti, nonne iniurius fueris et inpatientia sortem
exacerbes quam permutare non possis? Si uentis uela committeres, non quo
uoluntas peteret sed quo flatus impellerent, promoueres; si aruis semina
crederes, feraces inter se annos sterilesque pensares. Fortunae te regendum
dedisti; dominae moribus oportet obtemperes.  Tu uero uoluentis rotae
impetum retinere conaris? At, omnium mortalium stolidissime, si manere
incipit, fors esse desistit.






THE SECOND BOOK OF BOETHIUS




  I.

  After this she remained silent for a while; and, having by that her
  modesty made me attentive, began in this wise: "If I be rightly informed
  of the causes and condition of thy disease, thou languishest with the
  affection of thy former fortune, and the change of that alone, as thou
  imaginest, hath overthrown so much of thy mind. I know the manifold
  illusions of that monster, exercising most alluring familiarity with
  them whom she meaneth to deceive, to the end she may confound them with
  intolerable grief, by forsaking them upon the sudden, whose nature,
  customs, and desert, if thou rememberest, thou shalt know that thou
  neither didst possess nor hast lost anything of estimation in it; and,
  as I hope, I shall not need to labour much to bring these things to thy
  remembrance, for thou wert wont, when she was present, and flattered
  thee most, to assail her with manful words, and pursue her with
  sentences taken forth of our most hidden knowledge. But every sudden
  change of things happeneth not without a certain wavering and
  disquietness of mind. And this is the cause that thou also for a while
  hast lost thy former tranquillity and peace. But it is time for thee to
  take and taste some gentle and pleasant thing which being received may
  prepare thee for stronger potions. Wherefore let us use the sweetness of
  Rhetoric's persuasions, which then only is well employed when it
  forsaketh not our ordinances; and with this, let Music, a little slave
  belonging to our house, chant sometime lighter and sometime sadder
  notes.

  Wherefore, O man, what is it that hath cast thee into sorrow and grief?
  Thou hast, methinks, seen something new and unwonted. If thou thinkest
  that fortune hath altered her manner of proceeding toward thee, thou art
  in an error. This was alway her fashion; this is her nature. She hath
  kept that constancy in thy affairs which is proper to her, in being
  mutable; such was her condition when she fawned upon thee and allured
  thee with enticements of feigned happiness. Thou hast discovered the
  doubtful looks of this blind goddess. She, which concealeth herself from
  others, is wholly known to thee. If thou likest her, frame thyself to
  her conditions, and make no complaint. If thou detestest her treachery,
  despise and cast her off, with her pernicious flattery. For that which
  hath caused thee so much sorrow should have brought thee to great
  tranquillity. For she hath forsaken thee, of whom no man can be secure.
  Dost thou esteem that happiness precious which thou art to lose? And is
  the present fortune dear unto thee, of whose stay thou art not sure, and
  whose departure will breed thy grief? And if she can neither be kept at
  our will, and maketh them miserable whom she at last leaveth, what else
  is fickle fortune but a token of future calamity? For it is not
  sufficient to behold that which we have before our eyes; wisdom
  pondereth the event of things, and this mutability on both sides maketh
  the threats of fortune not to be feared, nor her flatterings to be
  desired. Finally, thou must take in good part whatsoever happeneth unto
  thee within the reach of fortune, when once thou hast submitted thy neck
  to her yoke. And if to her whom, of thine own accord, thou hast chosen
  for thy mistress, thou wouldest prescribe a law how long she were to
  stay, and when to depart, shouldst thou not do her mighty wrong, and
  with thy impatience make thy estate more intolerable, which thou canst
  not better? If thou settest up thy sails to the wind, thou shalt be
  carried not whither thy will desirest, but whither the gale driveth. If
  thou sowest thy seed, thou considerest that there are as well barren as
  fertile years. Thou hast yielded thyself to fortune's sway; thou must be
  content with the conditions of thy mistress. Endeavourest thou to stay
  the force of the turning wheel? But thou foolishest man that ever was,
  if it beginneth to stay, it ceaseth to be fortune.




I.

Haec cum superba uerterit uices dextra
Et aestuantis more fertur Euripi,
Dudum tremendos saeua proterit reges
Humilemque uicti subleuat fallax uultum.
Non illa miseros audit aut curat fletus                                    
Vltroque gemitus dura quos fecit ridet.
Sic illa ludit, sic suas probat uires
Magnumque suis demonstrat [ ] ostentum, si quis
Visatur una stratus ac felix hora.


[ ] monstrat _codd_.




  I

  The pride of fickle fortune spareth none,
  And, like the floods of swift Euripus borne, [ ]
  Oft casteth mighty princes from their throne,
  And oft the abject captive doth adorn.
  She cares not for the wretch's tears and moan,
  And the sad groans, which she hath caused, doth scorn.
  Thus doth she play, to make her power more known,
  Showing her slaves a marvel, when man's state
  Is in one hour both downcast and fortunate.


  [ ] Literally, "When fortune with proud right hand plies her changes
  and ebbs and flows like foaming Euripus." Euripus was proverbial for
  irregular tides.




II.

Vellem autem pauca tecum fortunae ipsius uerbis agitare. Tu igitur an ius
postulet, animaduerte. 'Quid tu homo ream me cotidianis agis querelis? Quam
tibi fecimus iniuriam? Quae tua tibi detraximus bona? Quouis iudice de opum
dignitatumque mecum possessione contende.  Et si cuiusquam mortalium
proprium quid horum esse monstraueris, ego iam tua fuisse quae repetis,
sponte concedam.

Cum te matris utero natura produxit, nudum rebus omnibus inopemque suscepi,
meis opibus foui et quod te nunc inpatientem nostri facit, fauore prona
indulgentius educaui, omnium quae mei iuris sunt affluentia et splendore
circumdedi. Nunc mihi retrahere manum libet. Habes gratiam uelut usus
alienis, non habes ius querelae tamquam prorsus tua perdideris. Quid igitur
ingemiscis? Nulla tibi a nobis est allata uiolentia. Opes honores ceteraque
talium mei sunt iuris. Dominam famulae cognoscunt; mecum ueniunt, me
abeunte discedunt. Audacter adfirmem, si tua forent quae amissa conquereris
nullo modo perdidisses. An ego sola meum ius exercere prohibebor? Licet
caelo proferre lucidos dies eosdemque tenebrosis noctibus condere. Licet
anno terrae uultum nunc floribus frugibusque redimire, nunc nimbis
frigoribusque confundere. Ius est mari nunc strato aequore blandiri, nunc
procellis ac fluctibus inhorrescere. Nos ad constantiam nostris moribus
alienam inexpleta hominum cupiditas alligabit? Haec nostra uis est, hunc
continuum ludum ludimus; rotam uolubili orbe uersamus, infima summis summa
infimis mutare gaudemus. Ascende si placet, sed ea lege ne utique[ ] cum
ludicri mei ratio poscet, descendere iniuriam putes. An tu mores ignorabas
meos? Nesciebas Croesum regem Lydorum Cyro paulo ante formidabilem mox
deinde miserandum rogi flammis traditum misso caelitus imbre defensum? Num
te praeterit Paulum Persi regis a se capti calamitatibus pias inpendisse
lacrimas? Quid tragoediarum clamor aliud deflet nisi indiscreto ictu
fortunam felicia regna uertentem? Nonne adulescentulus [Greek: doious
pithous ton men hena kakon ton d'heteron eaon] in Iouis limine iacere
didicisti? Quid si uberius de bonorum parte sumpsisti? Quid si a te non
tota discessi? Quid si haec ipsa mei mutabilitas iusta tibi causa est
sperandi meliora? Tamen ne animo contabescas et intra commune omnibus
regnum locatus proprio uiuere iure desideres.


[ ] utique _Klussmann_; uti _codd._




  II

  But I would urge thee a little with Fortune's own speeches. Wherefore
  consider thou if she asketh not reason. 'For what cause, O man, chargest
  thou me with daily complaints? What injury have I done thee? What goods
  of thine have I taken from thee? Contend with me before any judge about
  the possession of riches and dignities; and if thou canst show that the
  propriety of any of these things belong to any mortal wight, I will
  forthwith willingly grant that those things which thou demandest were
  thine. When Nature produced thee out of thy mother's womb, I received
  thee naked and poor in all respects, cherished thee with my wealth, and
  (which maketh thee now to fall out with me) being forward to favour
  thee, I had most tender care for thy education, and adorned thee with
  the abundance and splendour of all things which are in my power. Now it
  pleaseth me to withdraw my hand, yield thanks, as one that hath had the
  use of that which was not his own. Thou hast no just cause to complain,
  as though thou hadst lost that which was fully thine own. Wherefore
  lamentest thou? I have offered thee no violence. Riches, honours, and
  the rest of that sort belong to me. They acknowledge me for their
  mistress, and themselves for my servants, they come with me, and when I
  go away they likewise depart. I may boldly affirm, if those things which
  thou complainest to be taken from thee had been thine own, thou shouldst
  never have lost them. Must I only be forbidden to use my right? It is
  lawful for the heaven to bring forth fair days, and to hide them again
  in darksome nights. It is lawful for the year sometime to compass the
  face of the earth with flowers and fruits, and sometime to cover it with
  clouds and cold. The sea hath right sometime to fawn with calms, and
  sometime to frown with storms and waves. And shall the insatiable desire
  of men tie me to constancy, so contrary to my custom? This is my force,
  this is the sport which I continually use. I turn about my wheel with
  speed, and take a pleasure to turn things upside down. Ascend, if thou
  wilt, but with this condition, that thou thinkest it not an injury to
  descend when the course of my sport so requireth. Didst thou not know my
  fashion? Wert thou ignorant how Croesus, King of the Lydians, not long
  before a terror to Cyrus, within a while after came to such misery that
  he should have been burnt had he not been saved by a shower sent from
  heaven?[ ] Hast thou forgotten how Paul piously bewailed the
  calamities of King Perses his prisoner?[ ] What other thing doth the
  outcry of tragedies lament, but that fortune, having no respect,
  overturneth happy states? Didst thou not learn in thy youth that there
  lay two barrels, the one of good things and the other of bad,[ ] at
  Jupiter's threshold? But what if thou hast tasted more abundantly of the
  good? What if I be not wholly gone from thee? What if this mutability of
  mine be a just cause for thee to hope for better? Notwithstanding, lose
  not thy courage, and, living in a kingdom which is common to all men,
  desire not to be governed by peculiar laws proper only to thyself.


  [ ] Cf. Herod, i.  .

  [ ] Cf. Livy xlv.  . Paul=Aemilius Paulus surnamed Macedonius for his
  defeat of Perses last king of Macedonia in   B.C.

  [ ] _Il._ xxiv.  .




II.

Si quantas rapidis flatibus incitus
  Pontus uersat harenas
Aut quot stelliferis edita noctibus
  Caelo sidera fulgent
Tantas fundat opes nec retrahat manum                                      
  Pleno copia cornu,
Humanum miseras haud ideo genus
  Cesset flere querellas.
Quamuis uota libens excipiat deus
  Multi prodigus auri                                                     
Et claris auidos ornet honoribus,
  Nil iam parta uidentur,
Sed quaesita uorans saeua rapacitas
  Altos[ ] pandit hiatus.
Quae iam praecipitem frena cupidinem                                      
  Certo fine retentent,
Largis cum potius muneribus fluens
  Sitis ardescit habendi?
Numquam diues agit qui trepidus gemens
  Sese credit egentem.'                                                   


[ ] altos _vulg._; alios _codd. opt._




  II.

  If Plenty as much wealth should give, ne'er holding back her hand,
  As the swift winds in troubled seas do toss up heaps of sand,
  Or as the stars in lightsome nights shine forth on heaven's face,
  Yet wretched men would still accuse their miserable case.
  Should God, too liberal of His gold, their greedy wishes hear,
  And with bright honour them adorn; yet all that nothing were,
  Since ravenous minds, devouring all, for more are ready still.
  What bridle can contain in bounds this their contentless will,
  When filled with riches they retain the thirst of having more?
  He is not rich that fears and grieves, and counts himself but poor.'




III.

His igitur si pro se tecum fortuna loqueretur, quid profecto contra
hisceres non haberes, aut si quid est quo querelam tuam iure tuearis,
proferas oportet. Dabimus dicendi locum." Tum ego: "Speciosa quidem ista
sunt," inquam, "oblitaque Rhetoricae ac Musicae melle dulcedinis; tum
tantum, cum audiuntur, oblectant. Sed miseris malorum altior sensus est.
Itaque cum haec auribus insonare desierint, insitus animum maeror
praegrauat." Et illa: "Ita est," inquit. "Haec enim nondum morbi tui
remedia sed adhuc contumacis aduersum curationem doloris fomenta quaedam
sunt. Nam quae in profundum sese penetrent, cum tempestiuum fuerit
admouebo. Verumtamen ne te existimari miserum uelis, an numerum modumque
tuae felicitatis oblitus es?

Taceo quod desolatum parente summorum te uirorum cura suscepit delectusque
in affinitatem principum ciuitatis, quod pretiosissimum propinquitatis
genus est, prius carus quam proximus esse coepisti. Quis non te
felicissimum cum tanto splendore socerorum, cum coniugis pudore, cum
masculae quoque prolis opportunitate praedicauit? Praetereo, libet enim
praeterire communia, sumptas in adulescentia negatas senibus dignitates; ad
singularem felicitatis tuae cumulum uenire delectat. Si quis rerum
mortalium fructus ullum beatitudinis pondus habet, poteritne illius memoria
lucis quantalibet ingruentium malorum mole deleri, cum duos pariter
consules liberos tuos domo prouehi sub frequentia patrum, sub plebis
alacritate uidisti, cum eisdem in curia curules insidentibus tu regiae
laudis orator ingenii gloriam facundiaeque meruisti, cum in circo duorum
medius consulum circumfusae multitudinis expectationem triumphali
largitione satiasti? Dedisti ut opinor uerba fortunae, dum te illa
demulcet, dum te ut delicias suas fouet. Munus quod nulli umquam priuato
commodauerat abstulisti. Visne igitur cum fortuna calculum ponere? Nunc te
primum liuenti oculo praestrinxit. Si numerum modumque laetorum tristiumue
consideres, adhuc te felicem negare non possis. Quod si idcirco te
fortunatum esse non aestimas, quoniam quae tunc laeta uidebantur abierunt,
non est quod te miserum putes, quoniam quae nunc creduntur maesta
praetereunt. An tu in hanc uitae scaenam nunc primum subitus hospesque
uenisti? Vllamne humanis rebus inesse constantiam reris, cum ipsum saepe
hominem uelox hora dissoluat? Nam etsi rara est fortuitis manendi fides,
ultimus tamen uitae dies mors quaedam fortunae est etiam manentis. Quid
igitur referre putas, tune illam moriendo deseras an te illa fugiendo?




  III.

  Wherefore if fortune should plead with thee thus in her own defence,
  doubtless thou wouldst not have a word to answer her. But if there be
  anything which thou canst allege in thy own defence, thou must utter it.
  We will give thee full liberty to speak." Then I said: "These things
  make a fair show and, being set out with pleasant rhetoric and music,
  delight only so long as they are heard. But those which are miserable
  have a deeper feeling of their miseries. Therefore, when the sound of
  these things is past, hidden sorrow oppresseth the mind." "It is so
  indeed," quoth she, "for these be not the remedies of thy disease, but
  certain fomentations to assuage thy grief, which as yet resisteth all
  cure. But when it shall be time, I will apply that which shall pierce to
  the quick. And yet there is no cause why thou shouldst think thyself
  miserable. Hast thou forgotten how many ways, and in what degree thou
  art happy?

  I pass over with silence that, having lost thy father, thou wert
  provided for by men of the best sort, and, being chosen to have affinity
  with the chiefest of the city, thou begannest sooner to be dear unto
  them than to be akin, which is the most excellent kind of kindred. Who
  esteemed thee not most happy, having so noble a father-in-law, so chaste
  a wife, and so noble sons? I say nothing (for I will not speak of
  ordinary matters) of the dignities denied to others in their age, and
  granted to thee in thy youth. I desire to come to the singular top of
  thy felicity. If any fruit of mortal things hath any weight of
  happiness, can the remembrance of that light be destroyed with any cloud
  of miseries that can overcast thee? When thou sawst thy two sons being
  both Consuls together carried from their house, the Senators
  accompanying them, and the people rejoicing with them; when, they
  sitting in the Senate in their chairs of state, thou making an oration
  in the King's praise deservedst the glory of wit and eloquence. When in
  public assembly, thou, standing betwixt thy two sons, didst satisfy with
  thy triumphant liberality the expectation of the multitudes gathered
  together, I suppose thou flatteredst fortune, while she fawned thus upon
  thee, as her dearest friend. Thou obtainedst more at her hands than ever
  private man had before thee. Wilt thou then reckon with fortune? This is
  the first time that ever she frowned upon thee. If thou considerest the
  number and measure of thy joyful and sad accidents, thou canst not
  choose but think thyself fortunate hitherto; and if thou esteemest not
  thyself fortunate because those things which seemed joyful are past,
  there is no cause why thou shouldst think thyself miserable, since those
  things which thou now takest to be sorrowful do pass. Comest thou now
  first as a pilgrim and stranger into the theatre of this life? Supposest
  thou to find any constancy in human affairs, since that man himself is
  soon gone? For although things subject to fortune seldom keep touch in
  staying, yet the end of life is a certain death, even of that fortune
  which remaineth. Wherefore, what matter is it whether thou by dying
  leavest it, or it forsaketh thee by flying?




III.

Cum polo Phoebus roseis quadrigis
  Lucem spargere coeperit,
Pallet albentes hebetata uultus
  Flammis stella prementibus.
Cum nemus flatu Zephyri tepentis                                           
  Vernis inrubuit rosis,
Spiret insanum nebulosus Auster:
  Iam spinis abeat decus.
Saepe tranquillo radiat sereno
  Immotis mare fluctibus,                                                 
Saepe feruentes Aquilo procellas
  Verso concitat aequore.
Rara si constat sua forma mundo,
  Si tantas uariat uices,
Crede fortunis hominum caducis,                                           
  Bonis crede fugacibus.
Constat aeterna positumque lege est
  Vt constet genitum nihil."




  III.

  When Phoebus with his rosy team
    Showeth his lightsome beam,
  The dull and darkened stars retire
    Yielding to greater fire.
  When Zephyrus his warmth doth bring,
    Sweet roses deck the spring;
  Let noisome Auster blow apace,
    Plants soon will lose their grace.
  The sea hath often quiet stood
    With an unmoved flood,
  And often is turmoiled with waves,
    When boisterous Boreas raves.
  If thus the world never long tarry
    The same, but often vary,
  On fading fortunes then rely,
    Trust to those goods that fly.
  An everlasting law is made,
    That all things born shall fade."




IV.

Tum ego: "Vera," inquam, "commemoras, o uirtutum omnium nutrix, nec
infitiari possum prosperitatis meae uelocissimum cursum. Sed hoc est quod
recolentem uehementius coquit. Nam in omni aduersitate fortunae
infelicissimum est genus infortunii fuisse felicem." "Sed quod tu," inquit,
"falsae opinionis supplicium luas, id rebus iure imputare non possis. Nam
si te hoc inane nomen fortuitae felicitatis mouet, quam pluribus maximisque
abundes mecum reputes licet. Igitur si quod in omni fortunae tuae censu
pretiosissimum possidebas, id tibi diuinitus inlaesum adhuc inuiolatumque
seruatur, poterisne meliora quaeque retinens de infortunio iure causari?

Atqui uiget incolumis illud pretiosissimum generis humani decus Symmachus
socer et quod uitae pretio non segnis emeres, uir totus ex sapientia
uirtutibusque factus suarum securus tuis ingemiscit iniuriis. Viuit uxor
ingenio modesta, pudicitia pudore praecellens et, ut omnes eius dotes
breuiter includam, patri similis. Viuit inquam tibique tantum uitae huius
exosa spiritum seruat quoque uno felicitatem minui tuam uel ipsa
concesserim, tui desiderio lacrimis ac dolore tabescit.

Quid dicam liberos consulares quorum iam, ut in id aetatis pueris, uel
paterni uel auiti specimen elucet ingenii? Cum igitur praecipua sit
mortalibus uitae cura retinendae, o te si tua bona cognoscas felicem, cui
suppetunt etiam nunc quae uita nemo dubitat esse cariora! Quare sicca iam
lacrimas. Nondum est ad unum omnes exosa fortuna nec tibi nimium ualida
tempestas incubuit, quando tenaces haerent ancorae quae nec praesentis
solamen nec futuri spem temporis abesse patiantur."

"Et haereant," inquam, "precor; illis namque manentibus, utcumque se res
habeant, enatabimus. Sed quantum ornamentis nostris decesserit, uides." Et
illa: "Promouimus," inquit, "aliquantum, si te nondum totius tuae sortis
piget. Sed delicias tuas ferre non possum qui abesse aliquid tuae
beatitudini tam luctuosus atque anxius conqueraris. Quis est enim tam
conpositae felicitatis ut non aliqua ex parte cum status sui qualitate
rixetur? Anxia enim res est humanorum condicio bonorum et quae uel numquam
tota proueniat uel numquam perpetua subsistat. Huic census exuberat, sed
est pudori degener sanguis; hunc nobilitas notum facit, sed angustia rei
familiaris inclusus esse mallet ignotus. Ille utroque circumfluus uitam
caelibem deflet; ille nuptiis felix orbus liberis alieno censum nutrit
heredi. Alius prole laetatus filii filiaeue delictis maestus inlacrimat.
Idcirco nemo facile cum fortunae suae condicione concordat; inest enim
singulis quod inexpertus ignoret, expertus exhorreat. Adde quod felicissimi
cuiusque delicatissimus sensus est et nisi ad nutum cuncta suppetant, omnis
aduersitatis insolens minimis quibusque prosternitur; adeo perexigua sunt
quae fortunatissimis beatitudinis summam detrahunt. Quam multos esse
coniectas qui sese caelo proximos arbitrentur, si de fortunae tuae
reliquiis pars eis minima contingat? Hic ipse locus quem tu exilium uocas,
incolentibus patria est; adeo nihil est miserum nisi cum putes contraque
beata sors omnis est aequanimitate tolerantis. Quis est ille tam felix qui
cum dederit inpatientiae manus, statum suum mutare non optet? Quam multis
amaritudinibus humanae felicitatis dulcedo respersa est! Quae si etiam
fruenti iucunda esse uideatur, tamen quo minus cum uelit abeat retineri non
possit. Liquet igitur quam sit mortalium rerum misera beatitudo quae nec
apud aequanimos perpetua perdurat necanxios tota delectat.

Quid igitur o mortales extra petitis intra uos positam felicitatem? Error
uos inscitiaque confundit. Ostendam breuiter tibi summae cardinem
felicitatis. Estne aliquid tibi te ipso pretiosius? Nihil inquies. Igitur
si tui compos fueris, possidebis quod nec tu amittere umquam uelis nec
fortuna possit auferre. Atque ut agnoscas in his fortuitis rebus
beatitudinem constare non posse, sic collige.  Si beatitudo est summum
naturae bonum ratione degentis nec est summum bonum quod eripi ullo modo
potest, quoniam praecellit id quod nequeat auferri, manifestum est
quoniam[ ] ad beatitudinem percipiendam fortunae instabilitas adspirare
non possit. Ad haec quem caduca ista felicitas uehit uel scit eam uel
nescit esse mutabilem. Si nescit, quaenam beata sors esse potest
ignorantiae caecitate? Si scit, metuat necesse est, ne amittat quod amitti
posse non dubitat; quare continuus timor non sinit esse felicem. An uel si
amiserit, neglegendum putat? Sic quoque perexile bonum est quod aequo animo
feratur amissum. Et quoniam tu idem es cui persuasum atque insitum
permultis demonstrationibus scio mentes hominum nullo modo esse mortales
cumque clarum sit fortuitam felicitatem corporis morte finiri, dubitari
nequit, si haec afferre beatitudinem potest, quin omne mortalium genus in
miseriam mortis fine labatur. Quod si multos scimus beatitudinis fructum
non morte solum uerum etiam doloribus suppliciisque quaesisse, quonam modo
praesens facere beatos potest quae miseros transacta non efficit?


[ ] quin _codices_.




  IV.

  To which I answered: "The things which thou reportest are true, O nurse
  of all virtues, and I cannot deny the most speedy course of my
  prosperity. But this is that which vexeth me most, when I remember it.
  For in all adversity of fortune it is the most unhappy kind of
  misfortune to have been happy." "But," quoth she, "thou canst not justly
  impute to the things themselves that thou art punished for thy false
  opinion. For if this vain name of casual felicity moveth thee, let us
  make accompt with how many and how great things thou aboundest.
  Wherefore, if that which in all thy revenues of fortune thou esteemest
  most precious doth still by God's providence remain safe and untouched,
  canst thou, retaining the best, justly complain of misfortune?

  But thy father-in-law, Symmachus (that most excellent ornament of
  mankind) liveth in safety, and for the obtaining of which thou wouldst
  willingly spend thy life, that man wholly framed to wisdom and virtues,
  being secure of his own, mourneth for thy injuries. Thy wife liveth,
  modest in disposition, eminent in chastity, and, to rehearse briefly all
  her excellent gifts, like her father. She liveth, I say, and weary of
  her life reserveth her breath only for thee. In which alone even I must
  grant that thy felicity is diminished, she consumeth herself with tears
  and grief for thy sake.

  What should I speak of thy children, which have been Consuls, in whom
  already, as in children of that age, their father's or grandfather's
  good disposition appeareth? Wherefore, since the greatest care that
  mortal men have is to save their lives, O happy man that thou art, if
  thou knowest thine own wealth, who still hast remaining those things
  which no man doubteth to be dearer than life itself? And therefore cease
  weeping. Fortune hath not hitherto showed her hatred against you all,
  neither art thou assailed with too boisterous a storm, since those
  anchors hold fast which permit neither the comfort of the time present
  nor the hope of the time to come to be wanting."

  "And I pray God," quoth I, "that they may hold fast, for so long as they
  remain, howsoever the world goeth we shall escape drowning. But thou
  seest how great a part of our ornaments is lost." "We have gotten a
  little ground," quoth she, "if thy whole estate be not irksome unto
  thee. But I cannot suffer thy daintiness, who with such lamentation and
  anxiety complaineth that something is wanting to thy happiness. For who
  hath so entire happiness that he is not in some part offended with the
  condition of his estate? The nature of human felicity is doubtful and
  uncertain, and is neither ever wholly obtained, or never lasteth always.
  One man hath great revenues, but is contemned for his base lineage.
  Another's nobility maketh him known, but, oppressed with penury, had
  rather be unknown. Some, abounding with both, bewail their life without
  marriage. Some other, well married but wanting children, provideth
  riches for strangers to inherit. Others, finally, having children,
  mournfully bewail the vices which their sons or daughters are given to.
  So that scarce any man is pleased with the condition of his fortune. For
  there is something in every estate, which without experience is not
  known, and being experienced doth molest and trouble. Besides that,
  those which are most happy are most sensible,[ ] and unless all things
  fall out to their liking, impatient of all adversity, every little cross
  overthrows them, so small are the occasions which take from the most
  fortunate the height of their happiness. How many are there, thinkest
  thou, which would think themselves almost in Heaven if they had but the
  least part of the remains of thy fortune? This very place, which thou
  callest banishment, is to the inhabitants thereof their native land. So
  true it is that nothing is miserable but what is thought so, and
  contrariwise, every estate is happy if he that bears it be content. Who
  is so happy that if he yieldeth to discontent, desireth not to change
  his estate? How much bitterness is mingled with the sweetness of man's
  felicity, which, though it seemeth so pleasant while it is enjoyed, yet
  can it not be retained from going away when it will. And by this it
  appeareth how miserable is the blessedness of mortal things, which
  neither endureth alway with the contented, nor wholly delighteth the
  pensive.

  Wherefore, O mortal men, why seek you for your felicity abroad, which is
  placed within yourselves? Error and ignorance do confound you. I will
  briefly show thee the centre of thy chiefest happiness. Is there
  anything more precious to thee than thyself? I am sure thou wilt say,
  nothing. Wherefore, if thou enjoyest thyself, thou shalt possess that
  which neither thou wilt ever wish to lose nor fortune can take away. And
  that thou mayst acknowledge that blessedness cannot consist in these
  casual things, gather it thus. If blessedness be the chiefest good of
  nature endued with reason, and that is not the chiefest good which may
  by any means be taken away, because that which cannot be taken away is
  better, it is manifest that the instability of fortune cannot aspire to
  the obtaining of blessedness. Moreover, he that now enjoyeth this
  brittle felicity, either knoweth it to be mutable or no. If not, what
  estate can be blessed by ignorant blindness? And if he knoweth it, he
  must needs fear lest he lose that which he doubteth not may be lost,
  wherefore continual fear permitteth him not to be happy. Or though he
  should lose it, doth he think that a thing of no moment? But so it were
  a very small good which he would be content to lose. And because thou
  art one whom I know to be fully persuaded and convinced by innumerable
  demonstrations that the souls of men are in no wise mortal, and since it
  is clear that casual felicity is ended by the body's death, there is no
  doubt, if this can cause blessedness, but that all mankind falleth into
  misery by death. But if we know many who have sought to reap the fruit
  of blessedness, not only by death, but also by affliction and torments,
  how can present happiness make men happy, the loss of which causeth not
  misery?


  [ ] _i.e._ sensitive.




IV.

Quisquis uolet perennem
  Cautus ponere sedem
Stabilisque nec sonori
  Sterni flatibus Euri
Et fluctibus minantem                                                      
  Curat spernere pontum,
Montis cacumen alti,
  Bibulas uitet harenas.
Illud proteruus Auster
  Totis uiribus urget,                                                    
Hae pendulum solutae
  Pondus ferre recusant.
Fugiens periculosam
  Sortem sedis amoenae
Humili domum memento                                                      
  Certus figere saxo.
Quamuis tonet ruinis
  Miscens aequora uentus,
Tu conditus quieti
  Felix robore ualli                                                      
Duces serenus aeuum
  Ridens aetheris iras.




  IV.

  Who with an heedful care
  Will an eternal seat prepare,
  Which cannot be down cast
  By force of windy blast,
  And will the floods despise,
  When threatening billows do arise,
  He not on hills must stand,
  Nor on the dangerous sinking sand.
  For there the winds will threat,
  And him with furious tempests beat,
  And here the ground too weak
  Will with the heavy burden break.[ ]
  Fly then the dangerous case
  Of an untried delightful place,
  And thy poor house bestow
  In stony places firm and low.
  For though the winds do sound,
  And waves of troubled seas confound:
  Yet thou to rest disposed
  In thy safe lowly vale inclosed,
  Mayst live a quiet age,
  Scorning the air's distempered rage.


  [ ] Literally, "These shifting sands refuse to bear the weight laid
  upon them."




V.

Sed quoniam rationum iam in te mearum fomenta descendunt, paulo
ualidioribus utendum puto. Age enim si iam caduca et momentaria fortunae
dona non essent, quid in eis est quod aut uestrum umquam fieri queat aut
non perspectum consideratumque uilescat? Diuitiaene uel uestra uel sui
natura pretiosae sunt? Quid earum potius, aurumne an uis congesta pecuniae?
Atqui haec effundendo magis quam coaceruando melius nitent, si quidem
auaritia semper odiosos, claros largitas facit. Quod si manere apud quemque
non potest quod transfertur in alterum, tunc est pretiosa pecunia cum
translata in alios largiendi usu desinit possideri. At eadem si apud unum
quanta est ubique gentium congeratur, ceteros sui inopes fecerit. Et uox
quidem tota pariter multorum replet auditum; uestrae uero diuitiae nisi
comminutae in plures transire non possunt. Quod cum factum est, pauperes
necesse est faciant quos relinquunt. O igitur angustas inopesque diuitias
quas nec habere totas pluribus licet et ad quemlibet sine ceterorum
paupertate non ueniunt! An gemmarum fulgor oculos trahit? Sed si quid est
in hoc splendore praecipui, gemmarum est lux illa non hominum, quas quidem
mirari homines uehementer admiror. Quid est enim carens animae motu atque
compage quod animatae rationabilique naturae pulchrum esse iure uideatur?
Quae tametsi conditoris opera suique distinctione postremae aliquid
pulchritudinis trahunt, infra uestram tamen excellentiam conlocatae
admirationem uestram nullo modo merebantur. An uos agrorum pulchritudo
delectat? Quidni? Est enim pulcherrimi operis pulchra portio. Sic quondam
sereni maris facie gaudemus; sic caelum sidera lunam solemque miramur. Num
te horum aliquid attingit? Num audes alicuius talium splendore gloriari? An
uernis floribus ipse distingueris aut tua in aestiuos fructus intumescit
ubertas? Quid inanibus gaudiis raperis? Quid externa bona pro tuis
amplexaris? Numquam tua faciet esse fortuna quae a te natura rerum fecit
aliena. Terrarum quidem fructus animantium procul dubio debentur alimentis.
Sed si, quod naturae satis est, replere indigentiam uelis, nihil est quod
fortunae affluentiam petas. Paucis enim minimisque natura contenta est,
cuius satietatem si superfluis urgere uelis, aut iniucundum quod infuderis
fiet aut noxium. Iam uero pulchrum uariis fulgere uestibus putas, quarum si
grata intuitu species est, aut materiae naturam aut ingenium mirabor
artificis. An uero te longus ordo famulorum facit esse felicem? Qui si
uitiosi moribus sint, perniciosa domus sarcina et ipsi domino uehementer
inimica; sin uero probi, quonam modo in tuis opibus aliena probitas
numerabitur? Ex quibus omnibus nihil horum quae tu in tuis conputas bonis
tuum esse bonum liquido monstratur. Quibus si nihil inest appetendae
pulchritudinis, quid est quod uel amissis doleas uel laeteris retentis?
Quod si natura pulchra sunt, quid id tua refert? Nam haec per se a tuis
quoque opibus sequestrata placuissent. Neque enim idcirco sunt pretiosa
quod in tuas uenere diuitias, sed quoniam pretiosa uidebantur, tuis ea
diuitiis adnumerare maluisti. Quid autem tanto fortunae strepitu
desideratis? Fugare credo indigentiam copia quaeritis. Atqui hoc uobis in
contrarium cedit. Pluribus quippe adminiculis opus est ad tuendam pretiosae
supellectilis uarietatem, uerumque illud est permultis eos indigere qui
permulta possideant contraque minimum qui abundantiam suam naturae
necessitate non ambitus superfluitate metiantur. Itane autem nullum est
proprium uobis atque insitum bonum ut in externis ac sepositis rebus bona
uestra quaeratis? Sic rerum uersa condicio est ut diuinum merito rationis
animal non aliter sibi splendere nisi inanimatae supellectilis possessione
uideatur? Et alia quidem suis contenta sunt; uos autem deo mente consimiles
ab rebus infimis excellentis naturae ornamenta captatis nec intellegitis
quantam conditori uestro faciatis iniuriam. Ille genus humanum terrenis
omnibus praestare uoluit; uos dignitatem uestram infra infima quaeque
detruditis. Nam si omne cuiusque bonum eo cuius est constat esse
pretiosius, cum uilissima rerum uestra bona esse iudicatis, eisdem uosmet
ipsos uestra existimatione submittitis; quod quidem haud inmerito cadit.
Humanae quippe naturae ista condicio est ut tum tantum ceteris rebus cum se
cognoscit excellat, eadem tamen infra bestias redigatur, si se nosse
desierit. Nam ceteris animantibus sese ignorare naturae est; hominibus
uitio uenit. Quam uero late patet uester hic error qui ornari posse aliquid
ornamentis existimatis alienis? At id fieri nequit. Nam si quid ex
appositis luceat, ipsa quidem quae sunt apposita laudantur; illud uero his
tectum atque uelatum in sua nihilo minus foeditate perdurat. Ego uero nego
ullum esse bonum quod noceat habenti. Num id mentior? 'Minime,' inquis.
Atqui diuitiae possidentibus persaepe nocuerunt, cum pessimus quisque eoque
alieni magis auidus quidquid usquam auri gemmarumque est se solum qui
habeat dignissimum putat. Tu igitur qui nunc contum gladiumque sollicitus
pertimescis, si uitae huius callem uacuus uiator intrasses, coram latrone
cantares. O praeclara opum mortalium beatitudo quam cum adeptus fueris
securus esse desistis!




  V.

  But since the soothing of my reasons begins to sink into thee, I will
  use those which are somewhat more forcible. Go to the*n, if the gifts of
  fortune were not brittle and momentary, what is there in them which can
  either ever be made your own, or, well weighed and considered, seemeth
  not vile and of no accompt? Are riches precious in virtue either of
  their own nature or of yours? What part of them can be so esteemed of?
  The gold or the heaps of money? But these make a fairer show when they
  are spent than when they are kept. For covetousness alway maketh men
  odious, as liberality famous. And if a man cannot have that which is
  given to another, then money is precious when, bestowed upon others, by
  the use of liberality it is not possessed any longer. But if all the
  money in the whole world were gathered into one man's custody, all other
  men should be poor. The voice at the same time wholly filleth the ears
  of many, but your riches cannot pass to many, except they be diminished,
  which being done, they must needs make them poor whom they leave. O
  scant and poor riches, which neither can be wholly possessed of many,
  and come to none without the impoverishment of others! Doth the
  glittering of jewels draw thy eyes after them? But if there be any great
  matter in this show, not men but the jewels shine, which I exceedingly
  marvel that men admire. For what is there wanting life and members that
  may justly seem beautiful to a nature not only endued with life but also
  with reason? Which, though by their maker's workmanship and their own
  variety they have some part of basest beauty, yet it is so far inferior
  to your excellency that it did in no sort deserve your admiration. Doth
  the pleasant prospect of the fields delight you? Why not? For it is a
  fair portion of a most fair work. So we are delighted with a calm sea,
  so we admire the sky, the stars, the sun, and the moon. Do any of these
  belong to thee? Darest thou boast of the beauty which any of them have?
  Art thou thyself adorned with May flowers? Or doth thy fertility teem
  with the fruits of summer? Why rejoicest thou vainly? Why embracest thou
  outward goods as if they were thine own? Fortune will never make those
  things thine which by the appointment of Nature belong not to thee. The
  fruits of the earth are doubtless appointed for the sustenance of living
  creatures. But if thou wilt only satisfy want, which sufficeth Nature,
  there is no cause to require the superfluities of fortune. For Nature is
  contented with little and with the smallest things, and, if, being
  satisfied, thou wilt overlay it with more than needs, that which thou
  addest will either become unpleasant or hurtful. But perhaps thou
  thinkest it a fine thing to go decked in gay apparel, which, if they
  make a fair show, I will admire either the goodness of the stuff or the
  invention of the workman. Or doth the multitude of servants make thee
  happy? Who, if they be vicious, they are a pernicious burden to thy
  house, and exceedingly troublesome to their master; and if they be
  honest, how shall other men's honesty be counted amongst thy treasures?
  By all which is manifestly proved that none of these goods which thou
  accountest thine, are thine indeed. And if there is nothing in these
  worthy to be desired, why art thou either glad when thou hast them or
  sorry when thou losest them? Or what is it to thee, if they be precious
  by nature? For in this respect they would have pleased thee, though they
  had belonged to others. For they are not precious because they are come
  to be thine, but because they seemed precious thou wert desirous to have
  them. Now, what desire you with such loud praise of fortune? Perhaps you
  seek to drive away penury with plenty. But this falleth out quite
  contrary, for you stand in need of many supplies, to protect all this
  variety of precious ornaments. And it is true that they which have much,
  need much; and contrariwise, that they need little which measure not
  their wealth by the superfluity of ambition, but by the necessity of
  nature. Have you no proper and inward good, that you seek your goods in
  those things which are outward and separated from you? Is the condition
  of things so changed that a living creature, deservedly accounted divine
  for the gift of reason, seemeth to have no other excellency than the
  possession of a little household stuff without life? All other creatures
  are content with that they have of their own; and you, who in your mind
  carry the likeness of God, are content to take the ornaments of your
  excellent nature from the most base and vile things, neither understand
  you what injury you do your Creator. He would have mankind to excel all
  earthly things; you debase your dignity under every meanest creature.
  For if it be manifest that the good of everything is more precious than
  that whose good it is, since you judge the vilest things that can be to
  be your goods, you deject yourselves under them in your own estimation,
  which questionless cometh not undeservedly to pass; for this is the
  condition of man's nature, that then only it surpasseth other things
  when it knoweth itself, and it is worse than beasts when it is without
  that knowledge. For in other living creatures the ignorance of
  themselves is nature, but in men it is vice. And how far doth this error
  of yours extend, who think that any can be adorned with the ornaments of
  another? Which can in no wise be. For if any adjoined thing seem
  precious, it is that which is praised, but that which is covered and
  enwrapped in it remaineth, notwithstanding, with the foul baseness which
  it hath of itself. Moreover, I deny that to be good which hurteth the
  possessor. Am I deceived in this? I am sure thou wilt say no. But riches
  have often hurt their possessors, since every lewdest companion, who are
  consequently most desirous of that which is not their own, think
  themselves most worthy to possess alone all the gold and jewels in the
  world. Wherefore thou, who with much perturbation fearest now to be
  assailed and slain, if thou hadst entered the path of this life like a
  poor passenger, needest not be afraid, but mightest rejoice and sing
  even in the sight of most ravenous thieves.[ ] O excellent happiness
  of mortal riches, which, when thou hast gotten, thou hast lost thy
  safety!


  [ ] Cf. Juvenal, _Sat._ x.  - .




V.

Felix nimium prior aetas
Contenta fidelibus aruis
Nec inerti perdita luxu,
Facili quae sera solebat
Ieiunia soluere glande.                                                    
Non Bacchica munera norant
Liquido confundere melle
Nec lucida uellera Serum
Tyrio miscere ueneno.
Somnos dabat herba salubres,                                              
Potum quoque lubricus amnis,
Vmbras altissima pinus.
Nondum maris alta secabat
Nec mercibus undique lectis
Noua litora uiderat hospes.                                               
Tunc classica saeua tacebant,
Odiis neque fusus acerbis
Cruor horrida tinxerat arua.
Quid enim furor hosticus ulla
Vellet prior arma mouere,                                                 
Cum uulnera saeua uiderent
Nec praemia sanguinis ulla?
Vtinam modo nostra redirent
In mores tempora priscos!
Sed saeuior ignibus Aetnae                                                
Feruens amor ardet habendi.
Heu primus quis fuit ille
Auri qui pondera tecti
Gemmasque latere uolentes
Pretiosa pericula fodit?                                                  




  V.

    Too much the former age was blest,
  When fields their pleaséd owners failéd not,
    Who, with no slothful lust opprest,
  Broke their long fasts with acorns eas'ly got.
    No wine with honey mixéd was,
  Nor did they silk in purple colours steep;
    They slept upon the wholesome grass,
  And their cool drink did fetch from rivers deep.
    The pines did hide them with their shade,
  No merchants through the dangerous billows went,
    Nor with desire of gainful trade
  Their traffic into foreign countries sent.
    Then no shrill trumpets did amate
  The minds of soldiers with their daunting sounds,
    Nor weapons were with deadly hate
  Dyed with the dreadful blood of gaping wounds.
    For how could any fury draw
  The mind of man to stir up war in vain,
    When nothing but fierce wounds he saw,
  And for his blood no recompense should gain?
    O that the ancient manners would
  In these our latter hapless times return!
    Now the desire of having gold
  Doth like the flaming fires of Aetna burn.
    Ah, who was he that first did show
  The heaps of treasure which the earth did hide,
    And jewels which lay close below,
  By which he costly dangers did provide?




VI.

Quid autem de dignitatibus potentiaque disseram quae uos uerae dignitatis
ac potestatis inscii caelo exaequatis? Quae si in improbissimum quemque
ceciderunt, quae flammis Aetnae eructuantibus, quod diluuium tantas strages
dederint? Certe, uti meminisse te arbitror, consulare imperium, quod
libertatis principium fuerat, ob superbiam consulum uestri ueteres abolere
cupiuerunt, qui ob eandem superbiam prius regium de ciuitate nomen
abstulerant. At si quando, quod perrarum est, probis deferantur, quid in
eis aliud quam probitas utentium placet? Ita fit ut non uirtutibus ex
dignitate sed ex uirtute dignitatibus honor accedat. Quae uero est ista
uestra expetibilis ac praeclara potentia? Nonne, o terrena animalia,
consideratis quibus qui praesidere uideamini? Nunc si inter mures uideres
unum aliquem ius sibi ac potestatem prae ceteris uindicantem, quanto
mouereris cachinno! Quid uero, si corpus spectes, inbecillius homine
reperire queas quos saepe muscularum quoque uel morsus uel in secreta
quaeque reptantium necat introitus? Quo uero quisquam ius aliquod in
quempiam nisi in solum corpus et quod infra corpus est, fortunam loquor,
possit exserere? Num quidquam libero imperabis animo? Num mentem firma sibi
ratione cohaerentem de statu propriae quietis amouebis? Cum liberum quendam
uirum suppliciis se tyrannus adacturum putaret, ut aduersum se factae
coniurationis conscios proderet, linguam ille momordit atque abscidit et in
os tyranni saeuientis abiecit; ita cruciatus, quos putabat tyrannus
materiam crudelitatis, uir sapiens fecit esse uirtutis. Quid autem est quod
in alium facere quisquam[ ] possit, quod sustinere ab alio ipse non
possit? Busiridem accipimus necare hospites solitum ab Hercule hospite
fuisse mactatum. Regulus plures Poenorum bello captos in uincla coniecerat,
sed mox ipse uictorum catenis manus praebuit. Vllamne igitur eius hominis
potentiam putas, qui quod ipse in alio potest, ne id in se alter ualeat
efficere non possit? Ad haec si ipsis dignitatibus ac potestatibus inesset
aliquid naturalis ac proprii boni, numquam pessimis prouenirent. Neque enim
sibi solent aduersa sociari; natura respuit ut contraria quaeque iungantur.
Ita cum pessimos plerumque dignitatibus fungi dubium non sit, illud etiam
liquet natura sui bona non esse quae se pessimis haerere patiantur. Quod
quidem de cunctis fortunae muneribus dignius existimari potest, quae ad
improbissimum quemque uberiora perueniunt. De quibus illud etiam
considerandum puto, quod nemo dubitat esse fortem, cui fortitudinem inesse
conspexerit, et cuicumque uelocitas adest manifestum est esse uelocem. Sic
musica quidem musicos medicina medicos rhetorice rhetores facit. Agit enim
cuiusque rei natura quod proprium est nec contrariarum rerum miscetur
effectibus et ultro quae sunt auersa depellit. Atqui nec opes inexpletam
restinguere auaritiam queunt nec potestas sui compotem fecerit quem
uitiosae libidines insolubilibus adstrictum retinent catenis, et collata
improbis dignitas non modo non efficit dignos, sed prodit potius et
ostentat indignos. Cur ita prouenit? Gaudetis enim res sese aliter habentes
falsis compellare nominibus quae facile ipsarum rerum redarguuntur effectu;
itaque nec illae diuitiae nec illa potentia nec haec dignitas iure
appellari potest. Postremo idem de tota concludere fortuna licet in qua
nihil expetendum, nihil natiuae bonitatis inesse manifestum est, quae nec
se bonis semper adiungit et bonos quibus fuerit adiuncta non efficit.


[ ] quisque _codd. optimi_.




  VI.

  Now, why should I discourse of dignities and power which you, not
  knowing what true dignity and power meaneth, exalt to the skies? And if
  they light upon wicked men, what Aetnas, belching flames, or what deluge
  can cause so great harms? I suppose thou rememberest how your ancestors,
  by reason of the consuls' arrogancy, desired to abolish that government
  which had been the beginning of their freedom, who before, for the same
  cause, had removed the government of kings from their city. And if
  sometime, which is very seldom, good men be preferred to honours,[ ]
  what other thing can give contentment in them but the honesty of those
  which have them? So that virtues are not honoured by dignities, but
  dignities by virtue. But what is this excellent power which you esteemed
  so desirable? Consider you not, O earthly wights, whom you seem to
  excel? For if among mice thou shouldst see one claim jurisdiction and
  power to himself over the rest, to what a laughter it would move thee!
  And what, if thou respectest the body, canst thou find more weak than
  man, whom even the biting of little flies or the entering of creeping
  worms doth often kill? Now, how can any man exercise jurisdiction upon
  anybody except upon their bodies, and that which is inferior to their
  bodies, I mean their fortunes? Canst thou ever imperiously impose
  anything upon a free mind? Canst thou remove a soul settled in firm
  reason from the quiet state which it possesseth? When a tyrant thought
  to compel a certain free man by torments to bewray his confederates of a
  conspiracy attempted against him, he bit off his tongue, and spit it out
  upon the cruel tyrant's face,[ ] by that means wisely making those
  tortures, which the tyrant thought matter of cruelty, to be to him
  occasion of virtue. Now, what is there that any can enforce upon another
  which he may not himself be enforced to sustain by another? We read that
  Busiris, wont to kill his guests, was himself slain by his guest
  Hercules.[ ] Regulus had laid fetters upon many Africans taken in war,
  but ere long he found his own hands environed with his conqueror's
  chains.[ ] Wherefore thinkest thou the power of that man to be
  anything worth, who cannot hinder another from doing that to him which
  he can do to another? Moreover, if dignities and power had any natural
  and proper good in them, they would never be bestowed upon the worst
  men, for one opposite useth not to accompany another; nature refuseth to
  have contraries joined. So that, since there is no doubt but that men of
  the worst sort often enjoy dignities, it is also manifest that they are
  not naturally good which may follow most naughty men. Which may more
  worthily be thought of all fortune's gifts which are more plentifully
  bestowed upon every lewd companion. Concerning which, I take that also
  to be worthy consideration, that no man doubteth him to be a valiant man
  in whom he seeth valour, and it is manifest that he which hath swiftness
  is swift. So, likewise, music maketh musicians, physic physicians, and
  rhetoric rhetoricians. For the nature of everything doth that which is
  proper unto it, and is not mixed with contrary effects but repelleth all
  opposites. But neither can riches extinguish unsatiable avarice, nor
  power make him master of himself whom vicious lusts keep chained in
  strongest fetters. And dignity bestowed upon wicked men doth not only
  not make them worthy but rather bewrayeth and discovereth their
  unworthiness. How cometh this to pass? Because in miscalling things that
  are otherwise, you take a pleasure which is easily refuted by the effect
  of the things themselves. Wherefore, by right, these things are not to
  be called riches, this is not to be called power, that is not to be
  called dignity. Lastly, we may conclude the same of all fortunes in
  which it is manifest there is nothing to be desired, nothing naturally
  good, which neither are always bestowed upon good men, nor do make them
  good whom they are bestowed upon.


  [ ] The subject of _deferantur_ is _dignitates potentiaque_.

  [ ] The free man was the philosopher Anaxarchus: the tyrant, Nicocreon
  the Cypriote. For the story see Diogenes Laertius ix.  .

  [ ] Cf. Apollod. ii.  .  ; Claudian xviii.  ; Virg. _Georg._ iii.  .

  [ ] Cf. Cicero, _De Off._ iii.  .




VI.

Nouimus quantas dederit ruinas
Vrbe flammata patribusque caesis
Fratre qui quondam ferus interempto
Matris effuso maduit cruore
Corpus et uisu gelidum pererrans                                           
Ora non tinxit lacrimis, sed esse
Censor extincti potuit decoris.
Hic tamen sceptro populos regebat
Quos uidet condens radios sub undas
Phoebus extremo ueniens ab ortu,                                          
Quos premunt septem gelidi triones,
Quos Notus sicco uiolentus aestu
Torret ardentes recoquens harenas.
Celsa num tandem ualuit potestas
Vertere praui rabiem Neronis?                                             
Heu grauem sortem, quotiens iniquus
Additur saeuo gladius ueneno!"




  VI.

    We know what stirs he made
  Who did the Senate slay and Rome with fire invade,
    Who did his brother kill,
  And with his mother's blood his moistened hand did fill;
    Who looked on that cold face
  Tearless, and nicely marked her members' several grace.[ ]
    Yet his dread power controlled
  Those people whom the sun doth in the east behold,
    And those who do remain
  In western lands or dwell under Boötes' wain
    And those whose skins are tanned
  With southern winds, which roast and burn the parched sand.
    What? Could this glorious might
  Restrain the furious rage of wicked Nero's spite?
    But oh! mishap most bad,
  Which doth the wicked sword to cruel poison add!"


  [ ] Literally, "but could be the critic of her dead beauty." Cf. Suet.
  _Nero_  ; Tac. _Ann._ xiv.  .




VII.

Tum ego: "Scis," inquam, "ipsa minimum nobis ambitionem mortalium rerum
fuisse dominatam. Sed materiam gerendis rebus optauimus quo ne uirtus
tacita consenesceret." Et illa: "Atqui hoc unum est quod praestantes quidem
natura mentes sed nondum ad extremam manum uirtutum perfectione perductas
allicere possit, gloriae scilicet cupido et optimorum in rem publicam fama
meritorum; quae quam sit exilis et totius uacua ponderis, sic considera.
Omnem terrae ambitum, sicuti astrologicis demonstrationibus accepisti, ad
caeli spatium puncti constat obtinere rationem, id est ut, si ad caelestis
globi magnitudinem conferatur, nihil spatii prorsus habere iudicetur. Huius
igitur tam exiguae in mundo regionis quarta fere portio est, sicut
Ptolomaeo probante didicisti, quae nobis cognitis animantibus incolatur.
Huic quartae, si quantum maria paludesque premunt quantumque siti uasta
regio distenditur cogitatione subtraxeris, uix angustissima inhabitandi
hominibus area relinquetur. In hoc igitur minimo puncti quodam puncto
circumsaepti atque conclusi de peruulganda fama, de proferendo nomine
cogitatis? Aut quid habeat amplum magnificumque gloria tam angustis
exiguisque limitibus artata? Adde quod hoc ipsum breuis habitaculi saeptum
plures incolunt nationes lingua, moribus, totius uitae ratione distantes,
ad quas tum difficultate itinerum tum loquendi diuersitate tum commercii
insolentia non modo fama hominum singulorum sed ne urbium quidem peruenire
queat. Aetate denique Marci Tullii, sicut ipse quodam loco significat,
nondum Caucasum montem Romanae rei publicae fama transcenderat, et erat
tunc adulta Parthis etiam ceterisque id locorum gentibus formidolosa.
Videsne igitur quam sit angusta, quam compressa gloria quam dilatare ac
propagare laboratis? An ubi Romani nominis transire fama nequit, Romani
hominis gloria progredietur? Quid quod diuersarum gentium mores inter se
atque instituta discordant, ut quod apud alios laude apud alios supplicio
dignum iudicetur. Quo fit ut si quem famae praedicatio delectat, huic in
plurimos populos nomen proferre nullo modo conducat. Erit igitur peruagata
inter suos gloria quisque contentus et intra unius gentis terminos
praeclara illa famae inmortalitas coartabitur.

Sed quam multos clarissimos suis temporibus uiros scriptorum inops deleuit
obliuio! Quamquam quid ipsa scripta proficiant, quae cum suis auctoribus
premit longior atque obscura uetustas? Vos uero inmortalitatem uobis
propagare uidemini, cum futuri famam temporis cogitatis. Quod si
aeternitatis infinita spatia pertractes, quid habes quod de nominis tui
diuturnitate laeteris? Vnius etenim mora momenti, si decem milibus
conferatur annis, quoniam utrumque spatium definitum est, minimam, licet,
habet tamen aliquam portionem. At hic ipse numerus annorum eiusque
quamlibet multiplex ad interminabilem diuturnitatem ne comparari quidem
potest. Etenim finitis ad se inuicem fuerit quaedam, infiniti uero atque
finiti nulla umquam poterit esse collatio. Ita fit ut quamlibet prolixi
temporis fama, si cum inexhausta aeternitate cogitetur, non parua sed plane
nulla esse uideatur. Vos autem nisi ad populares auras inanesque rumores
recte facere nescitis et relicta conscientiae uirtutisque praestantia de
alienis praemia sermunculis postulatis. Accipe in huiusmodi arrogantiae
leuitate quam festiue aliquis inluserit. Nam cum quidam adortus esset
hominem contumeliis, qui non ad uerae uirtutis usum sed ad superbam gloriam
falsum sibi philosophi nomen induerat, adiecissetque iam se sciturum, an
ille philosophus esset, si quidem illatas iniurias leniter patienterque
tolerasset, ille patientiam paulisper adsumpsit acceptaque contumelia uelut
insultans: 'Iam tandem,' inquit, 'intellegis me esse philosophum?' Tum ille
nimium mordaciter: 'Intellexeram,' inquit, 'si tacuisses.' Quid autem est
quod ad praecipuos uiros, de his enim sermo est, qui uirtute gloriam
petunt, quid, inquam, est quod ad hos de fama post resolutum morte suprema
corpus attineat? Nam si, quod nostrae rationes credi uetant, toti moriuntur
homines, nulla est omnino gloria, cum is cuius ea esse dicitur non exstet
omnino. Sin uero bene sibi mens conscia terreno carcere resoluta caelum
libera petit, nonne omne terrenum negotium spernat quae se caelo fruens
terrenis gaudet exemptam?




  VII.

  Then I said: "Thou thyself knowest that the ambition of mortal things
  hath borne as little sway with me as with any, but I desired matter of
  action, lest old age should come upon me ere I had done anything." To
  which she answered: "This is the only thing which is able to entice such
  minds as, being well qualified by nature, are not yet fully brought to
  full excellence by the perfecting of virtues, I mean desire of glory,
  and fame of best deserts towards their commonwealth, which how slender
  it is, and void of all weight, consider this: thou hast learnt by
  astronomical demonstrations that the compass of the whole earth compared
  to the scope of heaven is no bigger than a pin's point, which is as much
  as to say that, if it be conferred with the greatness of the celestial
  sphere, it hath no bigness at all. And of this so small a region in the
  world only the fourth part is known to be inhabited by living creatures
  known to us, as Ptolemy[ ] proveth. From which fourth part, if thou
  takest away in imagination the seas, the marsh grounds, and all other
  desert places, there will scarcely be left any room at all for men to
  inhabit. Wherefore, enclosed and shut up in this smallest point of that
  other point, do you think of extending your fame and enlarging your
  name? But what great or heroical matter can that glory have, which is
  pent up in so small and narrow bounds? Besides that the little compass
  of this small habitation is inhabited by many nations, different in
  language, fashions, and conversation, to which by reason of the
  difficulties in travelling, the diversity of speech, and the scarcity of
  traffic, not only the Fame of particular men but even of cities can
  hardly come. Finally, in the age of Marcus Tullius, as he himself
  writeth,[ ] the fame of the Roman Commonwealth had not passed the
  mountain Caucasus, and yet it was then in the most flourishing estate,
  fearful even to the Parthians and to the rest of the nations about.
  Seest thou therefore how strait and narrow that glory is which you
  labour to enlarge and increase? Where the fame of the Roman name could
  not pass, can the glory of a Roman man penetrate? Moreover, the customs
  and laws of diverse nations do so much differ the one from the other,
  that the same thing which some commend as laudable, others condemn as
  deserving punishment. So that if a man be delighted with the praise of
  fame, it is no way convenient for him to be named in many countries.
  Wherefore, every man must be content with that glory which he may have
  at home, and that noble immortality of fame must be comprehended within
  the compass of one nation.

  Now, how many, most famous while they lived, are altogether forgotten
  for want of writers! Though what do writings themselves avail which
  perish, as well as their authors, by continuance and obscurity of time?
  But you imagine that you make yourselves immortal when you cast your
  eyes upon future fame. Whereas, if thou weighest attentively the
  infinite spaces of eternity, what cause hast thou to rejoice at the
  prolonging of thy name? For if we compare the stay of one moment with
  ten thousand years, since both be limited, they have some proportion,
  though it be but very small. But this number of years, how oft so ever
  it be multiplied, is no way comparable to endless eternity. For limited
  things may in some sort be compared among themselves, but that which is
  infinite admitteth no comparison at all with the limited. So that the
  fame of never so long time, if it be compared with everlasting eternity,
  seemeth not little but none at all. But without popular blasts and vain
  rumours you know not how to do well, and, rejecting the excellency of a
  good conscience and of virtue, you choose to be rewarded with others'
  tattling. Hear how pleasantly one jested at this vain and contemptible
  arrogancy. For having assaulted with reproachful speeches a certain
  fellow who had falsely taken upon him the name of a philosopher, not for
  the use of virtue but for vainglory, and having added that now he would
  know whether he were a philosopher or no by his gentle and patient
  bearing of injuries, the other took all patiently for a while, and
  having borne his contumely, as it were, triumphing, said: 'Dost thou now
  at length think me a philosopher?' To which he bitingly replied: 'I
  would have thought thee one if thou hadst holden thy peace.' But what
  have excellent men (for of these I speak) who seek for glory by virtue,
  what have we, I say, to expect for these by fame after final death hath
  dissolved the body? For if, contrary to our belief, men wholly perish,
  there is no glory at all, since he to whom it is said to belong is
  nowhere extant. But if a guiltless mind freed from earthly imprisonment
  goeth forthwith to heaven, will she not despise all earthly traffic who,
  enjoying heaven, rejoiceth to see herself exempted from earthly affairs?


  [ ] Claudius Ptolemaeus, mathematician, astronomer, geographer, fl.
  A.D.  - .

  [ ] Cf. _Somn. Scip._  .   ap. Macr. _Comment._ ii.  .




VII.

Quicumque solam mente praecipiti petit
  Summumque credit gloriam,
Late patentes aetheris cernat plagas
  Artumque terrarum situm.
Breuem replere non ualentis ambitum                                        
  Pudebit aucti nominis.
Quid o superbi colla mortali iugo
  Frustra leuare gestiunt?
Licet remotos fama per populos means
  Diffusa linguas explicet                                                
Et magna titulis fulgeat claris domus,
  Mors spernit altam gloriam,
Inuoluit humile pariter et celsum caput
  Aequatque summis infima.
Vbi nunc fidelis ossa Fabricii manent,                                    
  Quid Brutus aut rigidus Cato?
Signat superstes fama tenuis pauculis
  Inane nomen litteris.
Sed quod decora nouimus uocabula,
  Num scire consumptos datur?                                             
Iacetis ergo prorsus ignorabiles
  Nec fama notos efficit.
Quod si putatis longius uitam trahi
  Mortalis aura nominis,
Cum sera uobis rapiet hoc etiam dies,                                     
  Iam uos secunda mors manet.




  VII.

  He that to honour only seeks to mount
    And that his chiefest end doth count,
  Let him behold the largeness of the skies
    And on the strait earth cast his eyes;
  He will despise the glory of his name,
    Which cannot fill so small a frame.
  Why do proud men scorn that their necks should bear
    That yoke which every man must wear?
  Though fame through many nations fly along
    And should be blazed by every tongue,
  And houses shine with our forefathers' stories,
    Yet Death contemns these stately glories,
  And, summoning both rich and poor to die,
    Makes the low equal with the high.
  Who knows where faithful Fabrice' bones are pressed,
    Where Brutus and strict Cato rest?[ ]
  A slender fame consigns their titles vain
    In some few letters to remain.
  Because their famous names in books we read,
    Come we by them to know the dead?
  You dying, then, remembered are by none,
    Nor any fame can make you known.
  But if you think that life outstrippeth death,
    Your names borne up with mortal breath,
  When length of time takes this away likewise,
    A second death shall you surprise.


  [ ] Caius Luscinus Fabricius, Consul   B.C., opponent of Pyrrhus;
  Lucius Iunius Brutus, Consul   B.C., founder of the Republic; Marcus
  Porcius Cato (Cato maior). Consul   B.C., great-grandfather of M.
  Porcius Cato (Uticensis).




VIII.

Sed ne me inexorabile contra fortunam gerere bellum putes, est aliquando
cum de hominibus illa, fallax illa nihil, bene mereatur, tum scilicet cum
se aperit, cum frontem detegit moresque profitetur. Nondum forte quid
loquar intellegis. Mirum est quod dicere gestio, eoque sententiam uerbis
explicare uix queo. Etenim plus hominibus reor aduersam quam prosperam
prodesse fortunam. Illa enim semper specie felicitatis cum uidetur blanda,
mentitur; haec semper uera est, cum se instabilem mutatione demonstrat.
Illa fallit, haec instruit, illa mendacium specie bonorum mentes fruentium
ligat, haec cognitione fragilis felicitatis absoluit. Itaque illam uideas
uentosam, fluentem suique semper ignaram, hanc sobriam succinctamque et
ipsius aduersitatis exercitatione prudentem. Postremo felix a uero bono
deuios blanditiis trahit, aduersa plerumque ad uera bona reduces unco
retrahit. An hoc inter minima aestimandum putas quod amicorum tibi fidelium
mentes haec aspera, haec horribilis fortuna detexit, haec tibi certos
sodalium uultus ambiguosque secreuit, discedens suos abstulit, tuos
reliquit? Quanti hoc integer, ut uidebaris tibi fortunatus, emisses! Nunc
et amissas opes querere; quod pretiosissimum diuitiarum genus est amicos
inuenisti.




  VIII.

  But lest thou shouldst think that I am at implacable war with Fortune,
  there is a time when this thy goddess ceasing to deceive deserveth of
  men, to wit, when she declareth herself, when she discovereth her face
  and showeth herself in her own colours. Perhaps thou understandest not
  yet what I say. I would utter a wonderful thing, insomuch as I can
  scarcely explicate my mind in words. For I think that Fortune, when she
  is opposite, is more profitable to men than when she is favourable. For
  in prosperity, by a show of happiness and seeming to caress, she is ever
  false, but in adversity when she showeth herself inconstant by changing,
  she is ever true. In that she deceiveth, in this she instructeth; in
  that she imprisoneth the minds of men with falsely seeming goods, which
  they enjoy, in this she setteth them at liberty by discovering the
  uncertainty of them. Wherefore, in that thou shalt alway see her puffed
  up, and wavering, and blinded with a self-conceit of herself, in this
  thou shalt find her sober, settled, and, with the very exercise of
  adversity, wise. Finally, prosperity with her flatterings withdraweth
  men from true goodness, adversity recalleth and reclaimeth them many
  times by force[ ] to true happiness. Dost thou esteem it a small
  benefit that this rough and harsh Fortune hath made known unto thee the
  minds of thy faithful friends? She hath severed thy assured from thy
  doubtful friends; prosperity at her departure took away with her those
  which were hers, and left thee thine. How dearly wouldst thou have
  bought this before thy fall, and when thou seemedst to thyself
  fortunate! Now thou dost even lament thy lost riches; thou hast found
  friends, the most precious treasure in the world.


  [ ] Literally, "pulleth them back with a hook."




VIII.

Quod mundus stabili fide
Concordes uariat uices,
Quod pugnantia semina
Foedus perpetuum tenent,
Quod Phoebus roseum diem                                                   
Curru prouehit aureo,
Vt quas duxerit Hesperos
Phoebe noctibus imperet,
Vt fluctus auidum mare
Certo fine coerceat,                                                      
Ne terris liceat uagis
Latos tendere terminos,
Hanc rerum seriem ligat
Terras ac pelagus regens
Et caelo imperitans amor.                                                 
Hic si frena remiserit,
Quidquid nunc amat inuicem
Bellum continuo geret
Et quam nunc socia fide
Pulchris motibus incitant*,                                               
Certent soluere machinam.
Hic sancto populos quoque
Iunctos foedere continet,
Hic et coniugii sacrum
Castis nectit amoribus,                                                   
Hic fidis etiam sua
Dictat iura sodalibus.
O felix hominum genus,
Si uestros animos amor
Quo caelum regitur regat."                                                




  VIII.

  That this fair world in settled course her several forms should vary,
  That a perpetual law should tame the fighting seeds of things,
  That Phoebus should the rosy day in his bright chariot carry,
  That Phoebe should govern the nights which Hesperus forth brings,
  That to the floods of greedy seas are certain bounds assigned,
  Which them, lest they usurp too much upon the earth, debar,
  Love ruling heaven, and earth, and seas, them in this course doth bind.
  And if it once let loose their reins, their friendship turns to war,
  Tearing the world whose ordered form their quiet motions bear.
  By it all holy laws are made and marriage rites are tied,
  By it is faithful friendship joined. How happy mortals were,
  If that pure love did guide their minds, which heavenly spheres
    doth guide!"






ANICII MANLII SEVERINI BOETHII

V.C. ET INL. EXCONS. ORD. PATRICII

PHILOSOPHIAE CONSOLATIONIS

LIBER SECVNDVS EXPLICIT

INCIPIT LIBER III.




I.

Iam cantum illa finiuerat, cum me audiendi auidum stupentemque arrectis
adhuc auribus carminis mulcedo defixerat. Itaque paulo post: "O," inquam,
"summum lassorum solamen animorum quam tu me uel sententiarum pondere uel
canendi etiam iucunditate refouisti! Adeo ut iam me post haec inparem
fortunae ictibus esse non arbitrer. Itaque remedia quae paulo acriora esse
dicebas, non modo non perhorresco, sed audiendi auidus uehementer
efflagito." Tum illa "Sensi," inquit, "cum uerba nostra tacitus attentusque
rapiebas, eumque tuae mentis habitum uel exspectaui uel, quod est uerius,
ipsa perfeci. Talia sunt quippe quae restant, ut degustata quidem mordeant,
interius autem recepta dulcescant. Sed quod tu te audiendi cupidum dicis,
quanto ardore flagrares, si quonam te ducere aggrediamur agnosceres!"
"Quonam?" inquam. "Ad ueram," inquit, "felicitatem, quam tuus quoque
somniat animus, sed occupato ad imagines uisu ipsam illam non potest
intueri." Tum ego: "Fac obsecro et quae illa uera sit, sine cunctatione
demonstra." "Faciam," inquit illa, "tui causa libenter. Sed quae tibi causa
notior est, eam prius designare uerbis atque informare conabor ut ea
perspecta cum in contrariam partem flexeris oculos, uerae beatitudinis
speciem possis agnoscere.






THE THIRD BOOK OF BOETHIUS




  I.

  Though she had ended her verse, yet the sweetness of it made me remain
  astonished, attentive, and desirous to hear her longer. Wherefore, after
  a while, I said: "O most effectual refreshment of wearied minds, how
  have I been comforted with thy weighty sentences and pleasing music!
  Insomuch that I begin to think myself not unable to encounter the
  assaults of Fortune. Wherefore, I am not now afraid, but rather
  earnestly desire to know those remedies, which before thou toldest me
  were too sharp." To which she answered: "I perceived as much as thou
  sayest, when I saw thee hearken to my speeches with so great silence and
  attention, and I expected this disposition of thy mind, or rather more
  truly caused it myself. For the remedies which remain are of that sort
  that they are bitter to the taste, but being inwardly received wax
  sweet. And whereas thou sayest that thou art desirous to hear; how much
  would this desire increase if thou knewest whither we go about to bring
  thee!" "Whither?" quoth I. "To true felicity," quoth she, "which thy
  mind also dreameth of, but thy sight is so dimmed with phantasies that
  thou canst not behold it as it is." Then I beseeched her to explicate
  without delay wherein true happiness consisteth. To which she answered:
  "I will willingly do so for thy sake, but first I will endeavour to
  declare in words and to give shape to that which is better known unto
  thee, that, having thoroughly understood it, by reflecting of the
  contrary thou mayest discover the type of perfect blessedness.




I.

Qui serere ingenuum uolet agrum,
Liberat arua prius fruticibus,
Falce rubos filicemque resecat,
Vt noua fruge grauis Ceres eat.
Dulcior est apium mage labor,                                              
Si malus ora prius sapor edat.
Gratius astra nitent ubi Notus
Desinit imbriferos dare sonos.
Lucifer ut tenebras pepulerit
Pulchra dies roseos agit equos.                                           
Tu quoque falsa tuens bona prius
Incipe colla iugo retrahere.
Vera dehinc animum subierint."




  I.

  He that a fruitful field will sow,
  Doth first the ground from bushes free,
  All fern and briars likewise mow,
  That he his harvest great may see.
  Honey seems sweeter to our taste,
  If cloyed with noisome food it be.
  Stars clearer shine when Notus' blast
  Hath ceased the rainy storms to breed.
  When Lucifer hath night defaced,
  The day's bright horses then succeed.
  So thou, whom seeming goods do feed,
  First shake off yokes which so thee press
  That Truth may then thy mind possess."




II.

Tum defixo paululum uisu et uelut in augustam suae mentis sedem recepta sic
coepit: "Omnis mortalium cura quam multiplicium studiorum labor exercet,
diuerso quidem calle procedit, sed ad unum tamen beatitudinis finem nititur
peruenire. Id autem est bonum quo quis adepto nihil ulterius desiderare
queat. Quod quidem est omnium summum bonorum cunctaque intra se bona
continens, cui si quid aforet summum esse non posset, quoniam relinqueretur
extrinsecus quod posset optari. Liquet igitur esse beatitudinem statum
bonorum omnium congregatione perfectum. Hunc, uti diximus, diuerso tramite
mortales omnes conantur adipisci. Est enim mentibus hominum ueri boni
naturaliter inserta cupiditas, sed ad falsa deuius error abducit. Quorum
quidem alii summum bonum esse nihilo indigere credentes ut diuitiis
affluant elaborant; alii uero bonum quod sit dignissimum ueneratione
iudicantes adeptis honoribus reuerendi ciuibus suis esse nituntur. Sunt qui
summum bonum in summa potentia esse constituant; hi uel regnare ipsi uolunt
uel regnantibus adhaerere conantur. At quibus optimum quiddam claritas
uidetur, hi uel belli uel pacis artibus gloriosum nomen propagare
festinant. Plurimi uero boni fructum gaudio laetitiaque metiuntur; hi
felicissimum putant uoluptate diffluere. Sunt etiam qui horum fines
causasque alterutro permutent, ut qui diuitias ob potentiam uoluptatesque
desiderant uel qui potentiam seu pecuniae causa seu proferendi nominis
appetunt. In his igitur ceterisque talibus humanorum actuum uotorumque
uersatur intentio, ueluti nobilitas fauorque popularis quae uidentur
quandam claritudinem comparare, uxor ac liberi quae iucunditatis gratia
petuntur; amicorum uero quod sanctissimum quidem genus est, non in fortuna
sed in uirtute numeratur, reliquum uero uel potentiae causa uel
delectationis assumitur. Iam uero corporis bona promptum est ut ad
superiora referantur. Robur enim magnitudoque uidetur praestare ualentiam,
pulchritudo atque uelocitas celebritatem, salubritas uoluptatem; quibus
omnibus solam beatitudinem desiderari liquet. Nam quod quisque prae ceteris
petit, id summum esse iudicat bonum. Sed summum bonum beatitudinem esse
definiuimus; quare beatum esse iudicat statum quem prae ceteris quisque
desiderat.

Habes igitur ante oculos propositam fere formam felicitatis humanae--opes,
honores, potentiam, gloriam, uoluptates. Quae quidem sola considerans
Epicurus consequenter sibi summum bonum uoluptatem esse constituit, quod
cetera omnia iucunditatem animo uideantur afferre. Sed ad hominum studia
reuertor, quorum animus etsi caligante memoria tamen bonum suum repetit,
sed uelut ebrius domum quo tramite reuertatur ignorat. Num enim uidentur
errare hi qui nihilo indigere nituntur? Atqui non est aliud quod aeque
perficere beatitudinem possit quam copiosus bonorum omnium status nec
alieni egens sed sibi ipse sufficiens. Num uero labuntur hi qui quod sit
optimum, id etiam reuerentiae cultu dignissimum putent? Minime. Neque enim
uile quiddam contemnendumque est quod adipisci omnium fere mortalium
laborat intentio. An in bonis non est numeranda potentia? Quid igitur? Num
imbecillum ac sine uiribus aestimandum est, quod omnibus rebus constat esse
praestantius? An claritudo nihili pendenda est? Sed sequestrari nequit quin
omne quod excellentissimum sit id etiam uideatur esse clarissimum. Nam non
esse anxiam tristemque beatitudinem nec doloribus molestiisque subiectam
quid attinet dicere, quando in minimis quoque rebus id appetitur quod
habere fruique delectet? Atqui haec sunt quae adipisci homines uolunt eaque
de causa diuitias, dignitates, regna, gloriam uoluptatesque desiderant quod
per haec sibi sufficientiam, reuerentiam, potentiam, celebritatem,
laetitiam credunt esse uenturam. Bonum est igitur quod tam diuersis studiis
homines petunt; in quo quanta sit naturae uis facile monstratur, cum licet
uariae dissidentesque sententiae tamen in diligendo boni fine consentiunt.




  II.

  Then, for a while looking steadfastly upon the ground, and, as it were,
  retiring herself to the most secret seat of her soul, she began in this
  manner: "All men's thoughts, which are turmoiled with manifold cares,
  take indeed divers courses, but yet endeavour to attain the same end of
  happiness, which is that good which, being once obtained, nothing can be
  further desired. Which is the chiefest of all goods, and containeth in
  itself whatsoever is good, and if it wanted anything it could not be the
  chiefest, because there would something remain besides it which might be
  wished for. Wherefore, it is manifest that blessedness is an estate
  replenished with all that is good. This, as we said, all men endeavour
  to obtain by divers ways. For there is naturally ingrafted in men's
  minds an earnest desire of that which is truly good; but deceitful error
  withdraweth it to that which falsely seemeth such. So that some,
  esteeming it their greatest good to want nothing, labour by all means to
  abound with riches; others, deeming that to be good which is most
  deserving of honour, hunt after preferments, to be respected by their
  fellow-citizens. Others think it the greatest felicity to have great
  power and authority, and these will either reign themselves or at least
  procure to be great with princes. But they who think fame better than
  all these, make all speed possible to spread their names far and near,
  by achieving some worthy enterprise either in war or peace. Many measure
  good by joy and mirth, and their chiefest care is how they may abound
  with pleasure. Some interchange the ends and means of these things one
  with the other, wanting now riches for the sake of power and pleasure,
  now power for the sake of wealth and fame. At these and such other do
  men's actions and desires aim, as nobility and popularity, which make
  men esteemed; wife and children, which bring pleasure and delight. But
  friendship, that most sacred thing, is rather to be attributed to virtue
  than to fortune. Other things for the most part are desired either for
  power or pleasure. And it is an easy matter to reduce all corporal goods
  to the former heads. For strength and greatness give ability; beauty and
  swiftness, fame; and health yieldeth pleasure. By all which we
  manifestly seek for nothing else but happiness. For that which every man
  seeketh most after, is by him esteemed his greatest good. Which is all
  one with happiness. Wherefore he esteemeth that estate happy which he
  preferreth before all other.

  And thus thou hast in a manner seen the form of human felicity--riches,
  honour, power, glory, pleasure. Which Epicurus only considering,
  consequently took pleasure for his chiefest good, because all the rest
  seemed to delight the mind. But I return to the careful thoughts of men,
  whose minds, though obscured, yet seek after the greatest good, but like
  a drunken man know not the way home. For seem they to err who endeavour
  to want nothing? But nothing can cause happiness so much as the
  plentiful possession of all that is good, needing the help of none, but
  is sufficient of itself. Or do they err who take that which is best to
  be likewise most worthy of respect? No. For it is no vile or
  contemptible thing which almost all men labour to obtain. Or is not
  power to be esteemed good? Why, then, is that to be accounted feeble and
  of no force, which manifestly surpasses all other things? Or is fame to
  be contemned? But it cannot be ignored that the most excellent is also
  most famous. For to what purpose should I say that happiness is not sad
  or melancholy, or subject to grief and trouble, when even in smallest
  matters we desire that which we delight to have and enjoy? And these be
  the things which men desire to obtain, and to this end procure riches,
  dignities, kingdoms, glory, and pleasures, because by them they think to
  have sufficiency, respect, power, fame, delight, and joy. Wherefore,
  that is good which men seek after by divers desires, in which the force
  of nature is easily descried, since though there be many and different
  opinions, yet they agree in choosing for their end that which is good.




II.

Quantas rerum flectat habenas
Natura potens, quibus inmensum
Legibus orbem prouida seruet
Stringatque ligans inresoluto
Singula nexu, placet arguto                                                
Fidibus lentis promere cantu.
Quamuis Poeni pulchra leones
Vincula gestent manibusque datas
Captent escas metuantque trucem
Soliti uerbera ferre magistrum,                                           
Si cruor horrida tinxerit ora,
Resides olim redeunt animi
Fremituque graui meminere sui;
Laxant nodis colla solutis
Primusque lacer dente cruento                                             
Domitor rabidas imbuit iras.
Quae canit altis garrula ramis
Ales caueae clauditur antro;
Huic licet inlita pocula melle
Largasque dapes dulci studio                                              
Ludens hominum cura ministret,
Si tamen arto saliens texto
Nemorum gratas uiderit umbras,
Sparsas pedibus proterit escas,
Siluas tantum maesta requirit,                                            
Siluas dulci uoce susurrat.
Validis quondam uiribus acta
Pronum flectit uirga cacumen;
Hanc si curuans dextra remisit,
Recto spectat uertice caelum.                                             
Cadit Hesperias Phoebus in undas,
Sed secreto tramite rursus
Currum solitos uertit ad ortus.
Repetunt proprios quaeque recursus
Redituque suo singula gaudent                                             
Nec manet ulli traditus ordo
Nisi quod fini iunxerit ortum
Stabilemque sui fecerit orbem.




  II.

  How the first reins of all things guided are
  By powerful Nature as the chiefest cause,
  And how she keeps, with a foreseeing care,
  The spacious world in order by her laws,
  And to sure knots which nothing can untie,
  By her strong hand all earthly motions draws--
  To show all this we purpose now to try
  Our pliant string, our musick's thrilling sound.
  Although the Libyan lions often lie
  Gentle and tame in splendid fetters bound,[ ]
  And fearing their incensed master's wrath,
  With patient looks endure each blow and wound,
  Yet if their jaws they once in blood do bathe,
  They, gaining courage,[ ] with fierce noise awake
  The force which Nature in them seated hath,
  And from their necks the broken chains do shake;
  Then he that tamed them first doth feel their rage,
  And torn in pieces doth their fury slake.
  The bird shut up in an unpleasing cage,
  Which on the lofty trees did lately sing,
  Though men, her want of freedom to assuage,
  Should unto her with careful labour bring
  The sweetest meats which they can best devise,
  Yet when within her prison fluttering
  The pleasing shadows of the groves she spies,
  Her hated food she scatters with her feet,
  In yearning spirit to the woods she flies,
  The woods' delights do tune her accents sweet.
  When some strong hand doth tender plant constrain
  With his debased top the ground to meet,
  If it let go, the crooked twig again
  Up toward Heaven itself it straight doth raise.
  Phoebus doth fall into the western main,
  Yet doth he back return by secret ways,
  And to the earth doth guide his chariot's race.
  Each thing a certain course and laws obeys,
  Striving to turn back to his proper place;
  Nor any settled order can be found,
  But that which doth within itself embrace
  The births and ends of all things in a round.


  [ ] Literally, "and take food offered by the hand."

  [ ] Literally, "their spirits, hitherto sluggish, return."




III.

Vos quoque, o terrena animalia, tenui licet imagine uestrum tamen
principium somniatis uerumque illum beatitudinis finem licet minime
perspicaci qualicumque tamen cogitatione prospicitis eoque uos et ad uerum
bonum naturalis ducit intentio et ab eodem multiplex error abducit.
Considera namque an per ea quibus se homines adepturos beatitudinem putant
ad destinatum finem ualeant peruenire. Si enim uel pecuniae uel honores
ceteraque tale quid afferunt cui nihil bonorum abesse uideatur, nos quoque
fateamur fieri aliquos horum adeptione felices. Quod si neque id ualent
efficere quod promittunt bonisque pluribus carent, nonne liquido falsa in
eis beatitudinis species deprehenditur? Primum igitur te ipsum qui paulo
ante diuitiis affluebas, interrogo: Inter illas abundantissimas opes
numquamne animum tuum concepta ex qualibet iniuria confudit anxietas?"
"Atqui," inquam, "libero me fuisse animo quin aliquid semper angerer
reminisci non queo." "Nonne quia uel aberat quod abesse non uelles uel
aderat quod adesse noluisses?" "Ita est," inquam. "Illius igitur
praesentiam huius absentiam desiderabas?" "Confiteor," inquam. "Eget uero,"
inquit, "eo quod quisque desiderat?" "Eget," inquam. "Qui uero eget aliquo,
non est usquequaque sibi ipse sufficiens?" "Minime," inquam. "Tu itaque
hanc insufficientiam plenus," inquit, "opibus sustinebas?" "Quidni?"
inquam. "Opes igitur nihilo indigentem sufficientemque sibi facere nequeunt
et hoc erat quod promittere uidebantur. Atqui hoc quoque maxime
considerandum puto quod nihil habeat suapte natura pecunia ut his a quibus
possidetur inuitis nequeat auferri." "Fateor," inquam. "Quidni fateare, cum
eam cotidie ualentior aliquis eripiat inuito? Vnde enim forenses
querimoniae nisi quod uel ui uel fraude nolentibus pecuniae repetuntur
ereptae?" "Ita est," inquam. "Egebit igitur," inquit, "extrinsecus petito
praesidio quo suam pecuniam quisque tueatur?" "Quis id," inquam, "neget?"
"Atqui non egeret eo, nisi possideret pecuniam quam posset amittere?"
"Dubitari," inquam, "nequit." "In contrarium igitur relapsa res est; nam
quae sufficientes sibi facere putabantur opes, alieno potius praesidio
faciunt indigentes. Quis autem modus est quo pellatur diuitiis indigentia?
Num enim diuites esurire nequeunt? Num sitire non possunt? Num frigus
hibernum pecuniosorum membra non sentiunt? Sed adest, inquies, opulentis
quo famem satient, quo sitim frigusque depellant. Sed hoc modo consolari
quidem diuitiis indigentia potest, auferri penitus non potest. Nam si haec
hians semper atque aliquid poscens opibus expletur, maneat necesse est quae
possit expleri. Taceo quod naturae minimum, quod auaritiae nihil satis est.
Quare si opes nec submouere possunt indigentiam et ipsae suam faciunt, quid
est quod eas sufficientiam praestare credatis?




  III.

  You also, O earthly creatures, though slightly and as it were in a dream
  acknowledge your beginning, and though not perspicuously yet in some
  sort behold that true end of happiness, so that the intention of nature
  leadeth you to the true good, and manifold error withdraweth you from
  it. For consider whether those things, by which men think to obtain
  happiness, can bring them to their desired end. For if either money, or
  honour, or any of the rest be of that quality that they want nothing
  which is good, we will also confess that they are able to make men
  happy. But if they neither be able to perform that they promise, and
  want many things which are good, are they not manifestly discovered to
  have a false appearance of happiness? First then, I ask thee thyself,
  who not long since didst abound with wealth; in that plenty of riches,
  was thy mind never troubled with any injuries?" "I cannot remember,"
  quoth I, "that ever my mind was so free from trouble but that something
  or other still vexed me." "Was it not because thou either wantedst
  something which thou wouldst have had, or else hadst something which
  thou wouldst have wanted?" "It is true," quoth I. "Then thou desiredst
  the presence of that, and the absence of this?" "I confess I did," quoth
  I. "And doth not a man want that," quoth she, "which he desireth?" "He
  doth," quoth I. "But he that wanteth anything is not altogether
  sufficient of himself?" "He is not," quoth I. "So that thou feltest this
  insufficiency, even the height of thy wealth?" "Why not?" quoth I. "Then
  riches cannot make a man wanting nothing nor sufficient of himself, and
  this was that they seemed to promise. But this is most of all to be
  considered, that money hath nothing of itself which can keep it from
  being taken from them which possess it, against their will." "I grant
  it," quoth I. "Why shouldst thou not grant it, since that every day
  those which are more potent take it from others perforce? For from
  whence proceed so many complaints in law, but that money gotten either
  by violence or deceit is sought to be recovered by that means?" "It is
  so indeed," quoth I. "So that every man needeth some other help to
  defend his money?" "Who denies that?" quoth I. "But he should not need
  that help, unless he had money which he might lose?" "There is no doubt
  of that," quoth I. "Now then the matter is fallen out quite contrary;
  for riches, which are thought to suffice of themselves, rather make men
  stand in need of other helps. And after what manner do riches expel
  penury? For are not rich men hungry? Are they not thirsty? Or doth much
  money make the owners senseless of cold in winter? But thou wilt say,
  wealthy men have wherewithal to satisfy their hunger, slake their
  thirst, and defend themselves from cold. But in this sort, though want
  may be somewhat relieved by wealth, yet it cannot altogether be taken
  away. For if ever gaping and craving it be satiated by riches, there
  must needs always remain something to be satiated. I omit, that to
  nature very little, to covetousness nothing is sufficient. Wherefore if
  riches can neither remove wants, and cause some themselves, why imagine
  you that they can cause sufficiency?




III.

Quamuis fluente diues auri gurgite
  Non expleturas cogat auarus opes
Oneretque bacis colla rubri litoris
  Ruraque centeno scindat opima boue,
Nec cura mordax deseret superstitem,                                       
  Defunctumque leues non comitantur opes.




  III.

  Although the rich man from his mines of gold
  Dig treasure which his mind can never fill,
  And lofty neck with precious pearls enfold,
  And his fat fields with many oxen till,
  Yet biting cares will never leave his head,
  Nor will his wealth attend him being dead.




IV.

Sed dignitates honorabilem reuerendumque cui prouenerint reddunt. Num uis
ea est magistratibus ut utentium mentibus uirtutes inserant uitia
depellant? Atqui non fugare sed illustrare potius nequitiam solent; quo fit
ut indignemur eas saepe nequissimis hominibus contigisse, unde Catullus
licet in curuli Nonium sedentem strumam tamen appellat. Videsne quantum
malis dedecus adiciant dignitates? Atqui minus eorum patebit indignitas, si
nullis honoribus inclarescant. Tu quoque num tandem tot periculis adduci
potuisti ut cum Decorato gerere magistratum putares, cum in eo mentem
nequissimi scurrae delatorisque respiceres? Non enim possumus ob honores
reuerentia dignos iudicare quos ipsis honoribus iudicamus indignos. At si
quem sapientia praeditum uideres, num posses eum uel reuerentia uel ea qua
est praeditus sapientia non dignum putare? Minime. Inest enim dignitas
propria uirtuti, quam protinus in eos quibus fuerit adiuncta transfundit.
Quod quia populares facere nequeunt honores, liquet eos propriam dignitatis
pulchritudinem non habere.

In quo illud est animaduertendum magis. Nam si eo abiectior est quo magis a
pluribus quisque contemnitur, cum reuerendos facere nequeat quos pluribus
ostentat, despectiores potius improbos dignitas facit. Verum non impune;
reddunt namque improbi parem dignitatibus uicem quas sua contagione
commaculant. Atque ut agnoscas ueram illam reuerentiam per has umbratiles
dignitates non posse contingere; si qui multiplici consulatu functus in
barbaras nationes forte deuenerit, uenerandumne barbaris honor faciet?
Atqui si hoc naturale munus dignitatibus foret, ab officio suo quoquo
gentium nullo modo cessarent, sicut ignis ubique terrarum numquam tamen
calere desistit, sed quoniam id eis non propria uis sed hominum fallax
adnectit opinio, uanescunt ilico, cum ad eos uenerint qui dignitates eas
esse non aestimant.

Sed hoc apud exteras nationes. Inter eos uero apud quos ortae sunt, num
perpetuo perdurant? Atqui praetura magna olim potestas nunc inane nomen et
senatorii census grauis sarcina; si quis populi quondam curasset annonam,
magnus habebatur, nunc ea praefectura quid abiectius? Vt enim paulo ante
diximus, quod nihil habet proprii decoris, opinione utentium nunc
splendorem accipit nunc amittit. Si igitur reuerendos facere nequeunt
dignitates, si ultro improborum contagione sordescunt, si mutatione
temporum splendere desinunt, si gentium aestimatione uilescunt, quid est
quod in se expetendae pulchritudinis habeant, nedum aliis praestent?




  IV.

  But dignities make him honourable and reverend on whom they light. Have
  offices that force to plant virtues and expel vices in the minds of
  those who have them? But they are not wont to banish, but rather to make
  wickedness splendid. So that we many times complain because most wicked
  men obtain them. Whereupon Catullus called Nonius a scab or impostume
  though he sat in his chair of estate.[ ] Seest thou what great
  ignominy dignities heap upon evil men? For their unworthiness would less
  appear if they were never advanced to any honours. Could so many dangers
  ever make thee think to bear office with Decoratus,[ ] having
  discovered him to be a very varlet and spy? For we cannot for their
  honours account them worthy of respect whom we judge unworthy of the
  honours themselves. But if thou seest any man endued with wisdom, canst
  thou esteem him unworthy of that respect or wisdom which he hath? No,
  truly. For virtue hath a proper dignity of her own, which she presently
  endueth her possessors withal. Which since popular preferments cannot
  do, it is manifest that they have not the beauty which is proper to true
  dignity.

  In which we are farther to consider that, if to be contemned of many
  make men abject, dignities make the wicked to be despised the more by
  laying them open to the view of the world. But the dignities go not
  scot-free, for wicked men do as much for them, defiling them with their
  own infection. And that thou mayst plainly see that true respect cannot
  be gotten by these painted dignities, let one that hath been often
  Consul go among barbarous nations; will that honour make those barbarous
  people respect him? And yet, if this were natural to dignities, they
  would never forsake their function in any nation whatsoever; as fire,
  wheresoever it be, always remaineth hot. But because not their own
  nature, but the deceitful opinion of men attributeth that to them, they
  forthwith come to nothing, being brought to them who esteem them not to
  be dignities.

  And this for foreign nations. But do they always last among them where
  they had their beginning? The Praetorship, a great dignity in time past,
  is now an idle name, and an heavy burden of the Senate's fortune. If
  heretofore one had care of the people's provision, he was accounted a
  great man; now what is more abject than that office? For as we said
  before, that which hath no proper dignity belonging unto it sometime
  receiveth and sometime loseth his value at the users' discretion.
  Wherefore if dignities cannot make us respected, if they be easily
  defiled with the infection of the wicked, if their worth decays by
  change of times, if diversities of nations make them contemptible, what
  beauty have they in themselves, or can they afford to others, worth the
  desiring?


  [ ] Cf. Catull. lii.

  [ ] Decoratus was quaestor _circa_  ; cf. Cassiod. _Ep_. v.   and  .




IV.

Quamuis se Tyrio superbus ostro
  Comeret et niueis lapillis,
Inuisus tamen omnibus uigebat
  Luxuriae Nero saeuientis.
Sed quondam dabat improbus uerendis                                        
  Patribus indecores curules.
Quis illos igitur putet beatos
  Quos miseri tribuunt honores?




  IV.

  Though fierce and lustful Nero did adorn
  Himself with purple robes, which pearls did grace,
  He did but gain a general hate and scorn.
  Yet wickedly he officers most base
  Over the reverend Senators did place.
  Who would esteem of fading honours then
  Which may be given thus by the wickedest men?




V.

An uero regna regumque familiaritas efficere potentem ualet? Quidni, quando
eorum felicitas perpetuo perdurat? Atqui plena est exemplorum uetustas,
plena etiam praesens aetas, qui reges felicitatem calamitate mutauerint. O
praeclara potentia quae ne ad conseruationem quidem sui satis efficax
inuenitur! Quod si haec regnorum potestas beatitudinis auctor est, nonne si
qua parte defuerit, felicitatem minuat, miseriam inportet? Sed quamuis late
humana tendantur imperia, plures necesse est gentes relinqui quibus regum
quisque non imperet. Qua uero parte beatos faciens desinit potestas, hac
inpotentia subintrat quae miseros facit; hoc igitur modo maiorem regibus
inesse necesse est miseriae portionem. Expertus sortis suae periculorum
tyrannus regni metus pendentis supra uerticem gladii terrore simulauit.
Quae est igitur haec potestas quae sollicitudinum morsus expellere, quae
formidinum aculeos uitare nequit? Atqui uellent ipsi uixisse securi, sed
nequeunt; dehinc de potestate gloriantur. An tu potentem censes quem uideas
uelle quod non possit efficere? Potentem censes qui satellite latus ambit,
qui quos terret ipse plus metuit, qui ut potens esse uideatur, in
seruientium manu situm est? Nam quid ego de regum familiaribus disseram,
cum regna ipsa tantae inbecillitatis plena demonstrem? Quos quidem regia
potestas saepe incolumis saepe autem lapsa prosternit. Nero Senecam
familiarem praeceptoremque suum ad eligendae mortis coegit arbitrium.
Papinianum diu inter aulicos potentem militum gladiis Antoninus obiecit.
Atqui uterque potentiae suae renuntiare uoluerunt, quorum Seneca opes etiam
suas tradere Neroni seque in otium conferre conatus est; sed dum ruituros
moles ipsa trahit, neuter quod uoluit effecit. Quae est igitur ista
potentia quam pertimescunt habentes, quam nec cum habere uelis tutus sis et
cum deponere cupias uitare non possis? An praesidio sunt amici quos non
uirtus sed fortuna conciliat? Sed quem felicitas amicum fecit, infortunium
faciet inimicum. Quae uero pestis efficacior ad nocendum quam familiaris
inimicus?




  V.

  But can kingdoms and the familiarity of kings make a man mighty? Why
  not, when their felicity lasteth always? But both former and present
  times are full of examples that many kings have changed their happiness
  with misery. O excellent power, which is not sufficient to uphold
  itself! And if this strength of kingdoms be the author of blessedness,
  doth it not diminish happiness and bring misery, when it is in any way
  defective? But though some empires extend themselves far, there will
  still remain many nations out of their dominions. Now, where the power
  endeth which maketh them happy, there entereth the contrary which maketh
  them miserable, so that all kings must needs have less happiness than
  misery. That Tyrant, knowing by experience the dangers of his estate,
  signified the fears incident to a kingdom, by the hanging of a drawn
  sword over a man's head.[ ] What power is this, then, which cannot
  expel nor avoid biting cares and pricking fears? They would willingly
  have lived securely, but could not, and yet they brag of their power.
  Thinkest thou him mighty whom thou seest desire that which he cannot do?
  Thinkest thou him mighty who dareth not go without his guard; who
  feareth others more than they fear him; who cannot seem mighty, except
  his servants please? For what should I speak of kings' followers, since
  I show that kingdoms themselves are so full of weakness? Whom the power
  of kings often standing, but many times falling, doth overthrow. Nero
  compelled Seneca, his familiar friend and master, to make choice of his
  own death.[ ] Antoninus called Papinianus, who had been long a gallant
  courtier, to be cut in pieces with his soldiers' swords.[ ] Yet they
  would both have renounced their power, yea Seneca endeavoured to deliver
  up his riches also to Nero, and to give himself to a contemplative life.
  But their very greatness drawing them to their destruction, neither of
  them could compass that which they desired. Wherefore what power is this
  that the possessors fear, which when thou wilt have, thou art not
  secure, and when thou wilt leave, thou canst not avoid? Are we the
  better for those friends which love us not for our virtue but for our
  prosperity? But whom prosperity maketh our friend, adversity will make
  our enemy. And what plague is able to hurt us more than a familiar
  enemy?


  [ ] Cic. _Tusc. Disp._ v.  .  .

  [ ] Cf. Tac. _Ann._ xiv.  ,  .

  [ ] Cf. Spartian. _Caracallus_  .




V.

Qui se uolet esse potentem
Animos domet ille feroces
Nec uicta libidine colla
Foedis submittat habenis.
Etenim licet Indica longe                                                  
Tellus tua iura tremescat
Et seruiat ultima Thyle,
Tamen atras pellere curas
Miserasque fugare querelas
Non posse potentia non est.                                               




  V.

  Who would be powerful, must
  His own affections check,
  Nor let foul reins of lust
  Subdue his conquered neck.
  For though the Indian land
  Should tremble at thy beck,
  And though thy dread command
  Far Thule's isle obey,
  Unless thou canst withstand
  And boldly drive away
  Black care and wretched moan,
  Thy might is small or none.




VI.

Gloria uero quam fallax saepe, quam turpis est! Vnde non iniuria tragicus
exclamat:

  [Greek: O doxa doxa murioisi dae broton
  ouden gegosi bioton onkosas megan.]

Plures enim magnum saepe nomen falsis uulgi opinionibus abstulerunt; quo
quid turpius excogitari potest? Nam qui falso praedicantur, suis ipsi
necesse est laudibus erubescant. Quae si etiam meritis conquisita sit, quid
tamen sapientis adiecerit conscientiae qui bonum suum non populari rumore,
sed conscientiae ueritate metitur? Quod si hoc ipsum propagasse nomen
pulchrum uidetur, consequens est ut foedum non extendisse iudicetur. Sed
cum, uti paulo ante disserui, plures gentes esse necesse sit ad quas unius
fama hominis nequeat peruenire, fit ut quem tu aestimas esse gloriosum, pro
maxima parte terrarum uideatur inglorius. Inter haec uero popularem gratiam
ne commemoratione quidem dignam puto, quae nec iudicio prouenit nec umquam
firma perdurat. Iam uero quam sit inane quam futtile nobilitatis nomen,
quis non uideat? Quae si ad claritudinem refertur, aliena est. Videtur
namque esse nobilitas quaedam de meritis ueniens laus parentum. Quod si
claritudinem praedicatio facit, illi sint clari necesse est qui
praedicantur. Quare splendidum te, si tuam non habes, aliena claritudo non
efficit. Quod si quid est in nobilitate bonum, id esse arbitror solum, ut
inposita nobilibus necessitudo uideatur ne a maiorum uirtute degeneret.




  VI.

  As for glory, how deceitful it is oftentimes, and dishonest! For which
  cause the tragical poet deservedly exclaimeth: "O glory, glory, thou
  hast raised to honour and dignity myriads of worthless mortals!"[ ]
  For many have often been much spoken of through the false opinions of
  the common people. Than which what can be imagined more vile? For those
  who are falsely commended must needs blush at their own praises. Which
  glory though it be gotten by deserts, yet what adds it to a wise man's
  conscience who measureth his own good, not by popular rumours, but by
  his own certain knowledge? And if it seemeth a fair thing to have
  dilated our fame, consequently we must judge it a foul thing not to have
  it extended. But since, as I showed a little before, there must needs be
  many nations to which the fame of one man cannot arrive, it cometh to
  pass that he whom thou esteemeth glorious, in the greater part of the
  world seemeth to have no glory at all. And here now I think popular
  glory not worth the speaking of, which neither proceedeth from judgment,
  nor ever hath any firmness. Likewise, who seeth not what a vain and idle
  thing it is to be called noble? Which insofar as it concerneth fame, is
  not our own. For nobility seemeth to be a certain praise proceeding from
  our parents' deserts. But if praising causeth fame, they must
  necessarily be famous who are praised. Wherefore the fame of others, if
  thou hast none of thine own, maketh not thee renowned. But if there be
  anything good in nobility, I judge it only to be this, that it imposeth
  a necessity upon those which are noble, not to suffer their nobility to
  degenerate from the virtue of their ancestors.


  [ ] Eurip. _Androm._  .




VI.

Omne hominum genus in terris simili surgit ab ortu.
Vnus enim rerum pater est, unus cuncta ministrat.
Ille dedit Phoebo radios dedit et cornua lunae,
Ille homines etiam terris dedit ut sidera caelo,
Hic clausit membris animos celsa sede petitos.                             
Mortales igitur cunctos edit nobile germen.
Quid genus et proauos strepitis? Si primordia uestra
Auctoremque deum spectes, nullus degener exstat,
Ni uitiis peiora fouens proprium deserat ortum.




  VI.

  The general race of men from a like birth is born.
  All things one Father have, Who doth them all adorn,
  Who gave the sun his rays, and the pale moon her horn,
  The lofty heaven for stars, low earth for mortals chose;
  He souls fetched down from high in bodies did enclose;
  And thus from noble seed all men did first compose.
  Why brag you of your stock? Since none is counted base,
  If you consider God the author of your race,
  But he that with foul vice doth his own birth deface.




VII.

Quid autem de corporis uoluptatibus loquar, quarum appetentia quidem plena
est anxietatis; satietas uero poenitentiae? Quantos illae morbos, quam
intolerabiles dolores quasi quendam fructum nequitiae fruentium solent
referre corporibus! Quarum motus quid habeat iucunditatis, ignoro. Tristes
uero esse uoluptatum exitus, quisquis reminisci libidinum suarum uolet,
intelleget. Quae si beatos explicare possunt, nihil causae est quin pecudes
quoque beatae esse dicantur quarum omnis ad explendam corporalem lacunam
festinat intentio. Honestissima quidem coniugis foret liberorumque
iucunditas, sed nimis e natura dictum est nescio quem filios inuenisse
tortorem; quorum quam sit mordax quaecumque condicio, neque alias expertum
te neque nunc anxium necesse est admonere. In quo Euripidis mei sententiam
probo, qui carentem liberis infortunio dixit esse felicem.




  VII.

  Now what should I speak of bodily pleasures, the desire of which is full
  of anxiety, and the enjoying of them breeds repentance? How many
  diseases, how intolerable griefs bring they forth in the bodies of their
  possessors, as it were the fruits of their own wickedness! I know not
  what sweetness their beginnings have, but whosoever will remember his
  lusts shall understand that the end of pleasure is sadness. Which if it
  be able to cause happiness, there is no reason why beasts should not be
  thought blessed, whose whole intention is bent to supply their corporal
  wants. That pleasure which proceedeth from wife and children should be
  most honest; but it was too naturally spoken, that some tormentor
  invented children, whose condition, whatsoever it be, how biting it is,
  I need not tell thee, who hast had experience heretofore, and art not
  now free from care. In which I approve the opinion of Euripides, who
  said that they which had no children are happy by being
  unfortunate.[ ]


  [ ] Cf. _Androm._  .




VII.

Habet hoc uoluptas omnis,
Stimulis agit fruentes
Apiumque par uolantum
Vbi grata mella fudit,
Fugit et nimis tenaci                                                      
Ferit icta corda morsu.




  VII.

  All pleasure hath this property,
  She woundeth those who have her most.
  And, like unto the angry bee
  Who hath her pleasant honey lost,
  She flies away with nimble wing
  And in our hearts doth leave her sting.




VIII.

Nihil igitur dubium est quin hae ad beatitudinem uiae deuia quaedam sint
nec perducere quemquam eo ualeant ad quod se perducturas esse promittunt.
Quantis uero implicitae malis sint, breuissime monstrabo. Quid enim?
Pecuniamne congregare conaberis? Sed eripies habenti. Dignitatibus fulgere
uelis? Danti supplicabis et qui praeire ceteros honore cupis, poscendi
humilitate uilesces. Potentiamne desideras? Subiectorum insidiis obnoxius
periculis subiacebis. Gloriam petas? Sed per aspera quaeque distractus
securus esse desistis. Voluptariam uitam degas? Sed quis non spernat atque
abiciat uilissimae fragilissimaeque rei corporis seruum? Iam uero qui bona
prae se corporis ferunt, quam exigua, quam fragili possessione nituntur!
Num enim elephantos mole, tauros robore superare poteritis, num tigres
uelocitate praeibitis? Respicite caeli spatium, firmitudinem, celeritatem
et aliquando desinite uilia mirari. Quod quidem caelum non his potius est
quam sua qua regitur ratione mirandum. Formae uero nitor ut rapidus est, ut
uelox et uernalium florum mutabilitate fugacior! Quod si, ut
Aristoteles[ ] ait, Lynceis oculis homines uterentur, ut eorum uisus
obstantia penetraret, nonne introspectis uisceribus illud Alcibiadis
superficie pulcherrimum corpus turpissimum uideretur? Igitur te pulchrum
uideri non tua natura sed oculorum spectantium reddit infirmitas. Sed
aestimate quam uultis nimio corporis bona, dum sciatis hoc quodcumque
miramini triduanae febris igniculo posse dissolui!  Ex quibus omnibus illud
redigere in summam licet, quod haec quae nec praestare quae pollicentur
bona possunt nec omnium bonorum congregatione perfecta sunt, ea nec ad
beatitudinem quasi quidam calles ferunt nec beatos ipsa perficiunt.


[ ] Probably from the lost _Protrepticus_ of Aristotle. See Bywater,
_Journal of Philology_, ii. ( ),  , and Hartlich, _Leipz. Stud._ xi.
( ),  .




  VIII.

  Wherefore there is no doubt but that these ways to happiness are only
  certain by-paths, which can never bring any man thither whither they
  promise to lead him. And with how great evils they are beset, I will
  briefly show. For what? Wilt thou endeavour to gather money? But thou
  shalt take it away from him who hath it. Wilt thou excel in dignities?
  Thou shalt crouch to the giver, and thou who desirest to surpass others
  in honour shalt become vile by thy baseness in begging. Wishest thou for
  power? Thou shalt be in danger of thy subjects' treacheries. Seekest
  thou for glory? But, drawn into many dangers, thou shalt lose thy
  safety. Wilt thou live a voluptuous life? But who would not despise and
  neglect the service of so vile and frail a thing as his body? Now they
  who boast of the habilities of their body, upon how unsteadfast a
  possession do they ground themselves! For can you be bigger than
  elephants, or stronger than bulls? Or swifter than tigers? Look upon the
  space, firmness, and speedy motion of the heavens, and cease at length
  to have in admiration these base things. Which heavens are not more to
  be admired for these qualities than for the manner of their government.
  As for the glittering of beauty, how soon and swiftly doth it vanish
  away! As suddenly decaying and changing as the frail flowers in the
  spring. And if, as Aristotle saith, men had Lynceus's eyes, that they
  could see through stone walls, would not they judge that body of
  Alcibiades, seeming outwardly most fair, to be most foul and ugly by
  discovering his entrails? Wherefore not thy nature but the weakness of
  the beholders' eyes maketh thee seem fair. But esteem the goods of the
  body as much as you will, so that you acknowledge this, that whatsoever
  you admire may be dissolved with the burning of an ague of three days.
  Out of which we may briefly collect this sum; that these goods, which
  can neither perform that they promise, nor are perfect by having all
  that is good, do neither, as so many paths, lead men to happiness, nor
  make men happy of themselves.




VIII.

Eheu quae miseros tramite deuios
  Abducit ignorantia!
Non aurum in uiridi quaeritis arbore
  Nec uite gemmas carpitis,
Non altis laqueos montibus abditis                                         
  Vt pisce ditetis dapes
Nec uobis capreas si libeat sequi,
  Tyrrhena captatis uada.
Ipsos quin etiam fluctibus abditos
  Norunt recessus aequoris,                                               
Quae gemmis niueis unda feracior
  Vel quae rubentis purpurae
Nec non quae tenero pisce uel asperis
  Praestent echinis litora.
Sed quonam lateat quod cupiunt bonum,                                     
  Nescire caeci sustinent,
Et quod stelliferum trans abiit polum,
  Tellure demersi petunt.
Quid dignum stolidis mentibus inprecer?
  Opes honores ambiant;                                                   
Et cum falsa graui mole parauerint,
  Tum uera cognoscant bona.




  VIII.

  Alas, how ignorance makes wretches stray
        Out of the way!
  You from green trees expect no golden mines
        Nor pearls from vines,
  Nor use you on mountains to lay your net
        Fishes to get,
  Nor, if the pleasant sport of hunting please,
        Run you to seas.
  Men will be skilful in the hidden caves
        Of the ocean waves,
  And in what coasts the orient pearls are bred,
        Or purple red,
  Also, what different sorts of fishes store
        Each several shore.
  But when they come their chiefest good to find,
        Then are they blind,
  And search for that under the earth, which lies
        Above the skies.
  How should I curse these fools? Let thirst them hold
        Of fame and gold,
  That, having got false goods with pain, they learn
        True to discern.




IX.

"Hactenus mendacis formam felicitatis ostendisse suffecerit, quam si
perspicaciter intueris, ordo est deinceps quae sit uera monstrare." "Atqui
uideo," inquam, "nec opibus sufficientiam nec regnis potentiam nec
reuerentiam dignitatibus nec celebritatem gloria nec laetitiam uoluptatibus
posse contingere." "An etiam causas, cur id ita sit, deprehendisti?" "Tenui
quidem ueluti rimula mihi uideor intueri, sed ex te apertius cognoscere
malim."

"Atqui promptissima ratio est. Quod enim simplex est indiuisumque natura,
id error humanus separat et a uero atque perfecto ad falsum imperfectumque
traducit. An tu arbitraris quod nihilo indigeat egere potentia?" "Minime,"
inquam. "Recte tu quidem. Nam si quid est quod in ulla re inbecillioris
ualentiae sit, in hac praesidio necesse est egeat alieno." "Ita est,"
inquam. "Igitur sufficientiae potentiaeque una est eademque natura." "Sic
uidetur." "Quod uero huiusmodi sit, spernendumne esse censes an contra
rerum omnium ueneratione dignissimum?" "At hoc," inquam, "ne dubitari
quidem potest." "Addamus igitur sufficientiae potentiaeque reuerentiam, ut
haec tria unum esse iudicemus." "Addamus, si quidem uera uolumus
confiteri."

"Quid uero," inquit, "obscurumne hoc atque ignobile censes esse an omni
celebritate clarissimum? Considera uero, ne quod nihilo indigere, quod
potentissimum, quod honore dignissimum esse concessum est, egere
claritudine quam sibi praestare non possit atque ob id aliqua ex parte
uideatur abiectius." "Non possum," inquam, "quin hoc uti est ita etiam
celeberrimum esse confitear." "Consequens igitur est ut claritudinem
superioribus tribus nihil differre fateamur." "Consequitur," inquam. "Quod
igitur nullius egeat alieni, quod suis cuncta uiribus possit, quod sit
clarum atque reuerendum, nonne hoc etiam constat esse laetissimum?" "Sed
unde huic," inquam, "tali maeror ullus obrepat ne cogitare quidem possum;
quare plenum esse laetitiae, si quidem superiora manebunt, necesse est
confiteri." "Atqui illud quoque per eadem necessarium est sufficientiae,
potentiae, claritudinis, reuerentiae, iucunditatis nomina quidem esse
diuersa, nullo modo uero discrepare substantiam." "Necesse est," inquam.
"Hoc igitur quod est unum simplexque natura, prauitas humana dispertit et
dum rei quae partibus caret partem conatur adipisci, nec portionem quae
nulla est nec ipsam quam minime affectat assequitur." "Quonam," inquam,
"modo?" "Qui diuitias," inquit, "petit penuriae fuga, de potentia nihil
laborat, uilis obscurusque esse mauult, multas etiam sibi naturales quoque
subtrahit uoluptates, ne pecuniam quam parauit amittat. Sed hoc modo ne
sufficientia quidem contingit ei quem ualentia deserit, quem molestia
pungit, quem uilitas abicit, quem recondit obscuritas. Qui uero solum posse
desiderat, profligat opes, despicit uoluptates honoremque potentia carentem
gloriam quoque nihili pendit. Sed hunc quoque quam multa deficiant uides.
Fit enim ut aliquando necessariis egeat, ut anxietatibus mordeatur cumque
haec depellere nequeat, etiam id quod maxime petebat potens esse desistat.
Similiter ratiocinari de honoribus, gloria, uoluptatibus licet. Nam cum
unumquodque horum idem quod cetera sit, quisquis horum aliquid sine ceteris
petit, ne illud quidem quod desiderat apprehendit." "Quid igitur?" inquam.
"Si qui cuncta simul cupiat adipisci, summam quidem ille beatitudinis
uelit. Sed num in his eam reperiet, quae demonstrauimus id quod pollicentur
non posse conferre?" "Minime," inquam. "In his igitur quae singula quaedam
expetendorum praestare creduntur, beatitudo nullo modo uestiganda est."
"Fateor," inquam, "et hoc nihil dici uerius potest." "Habes igitur,"
inquit, "et formam falsae felicitatis et causas. Deflecte nunc in aduersum
mentis intuitum; ibi enim ueram quam promisimus statim uidebis." "Atqui
haec," inquam, "uel caeco perspicua est eamque tu paulo ante monstrasti,
dum falsae causas aperire conaris. Nam nisi fallor ea uera est et perfecta
felicitas quae sufficientem, potentem, reuerendum, celebrem laetumque
perficiat. Atque ut me interius animaduertisse cognoscas, quae unum horum,
quoniam idem cuncta sunt, ueraciter praestare potest hanc esse plenam
beatitudinem sine ambiguitate cognosco." "O te alumne hac opinione felicem,
si quidem hoc," inquit, "adieceris...." "Quidnam?" inquam. "Essene aliquid
in his mortalibus caducisque rebus putas quod huiusmodi statum possit
afferre?" "Minime," inquam, "puto idque a te, nihil ut amplius desideretur,
ostensum est." "Haec igitur uel imagines ueri boni uel inperfecta quaedam
bona dare mortalibus uidentur, uerum autem atque perfectum bonum conferre
non possunt." "Assentior," inquam. "Quoniam igitur agnouisti quae uera illa
sit, quae autem beatitudinem mentiantur, nunc superest ut unde ueram hanc
petere possis agnoscas." "Id quidem," inquam, "iam dudum uehementer
exspecto." "Sed cum, ut in Timaeo[ ] Platoni," inquit, "nostro placet, in
minimis quoque rebus diuinum praesidium debeat implorari, quid nunc
faciendum censes, ut illius summi boni sedem reperire mereamur?"
"Inuocandum," inquam, "rerum omnium patrem, quo praetermisso nullum rite
fundatur exordium." "Recte," inquit, ac simul ita modulata est.


[ ] uti Timaeo _codd. optimi._




  IX.

  "Let it suffice that we have hitherto discovered the form of false
  felicity, which if thou hast plainly seen, order now requireth that we
  show thee in what true happiness consisteth." "I see," quoth I, "that
  neither sufficiency by riches, nor power by kingdoms, nor respect by
  dignities, nor renown by glory, nor joy can be gotten by pleasures."
  "Hast thou also understood the causes why it is so?" "Methink I have a
  little glimpse of them, but I had rather thou wouldst declare them more
  plainly."

  "The reason is manifest, for that which is simple and undivided of
  itself, is divided by men's error, and is translated from true and
  perfect to false and unperfect. Thinkest thou that which needeth
  nothing, to stand in need of power?" "No," quoth I. "Thou sayest well,
  for if any power in any respect be weak, in this it must necessarily
  stand in need of the help of others." "It is true," quoth I. "Wherefore
  sufficiency and power have one and the same nature." "So it seemeth."
  "Now thinkest thou, that which is of this sort ought to be despised, or
  rather that it is worthy to be respected above all other things?" "There
  can be no doubt of this," quoth I. "Let us add respect then to
  sufficiency and power, so that we judge these three to be one." "We must
  add it if we confess the truth."

  "What now," quoth she, "thinkest thou this to be obscure and base, or
  rather most excellent and famous? Consider whether that which thou hast
  granted to want nothing, to be most potent, and most worthy of honour,
  may seem to want fame, which it cannot yield itself, and for that cause
  be in some respect more abject." "I must needs confess," quoth I, "that,
  being what it is, this is also most famous." "Consequently then we must
  acknowledge that fame differeth nothing from the former three." "We must
  so," quoth I. "Wherefore that which wanteth nothing, which can perform
  all things by its own power, which is famous and respected, is it not
  manifest that it is also most pleasant?" To which I answered: "How such
  a man should fall into any grief, I can by no means imagine. Wherefore
  if that which we have said hitherto be true, we must needs confess that
  he is most joyful and content." "And by the same reason it followeth
  that sufficiency, power, fame, respect, pleasure have indeed divers
  names, but differ not in substance." "It followeth indeed," quoth I.
  "This then, which is one and simple by nature, man's wickedness
  divideth, and while he endeavoureth to obtain part of that which hath no
  parts, he neither getteth a part, which is none, nor the whole, which he
  seeketh not after." "How is this?" quoth I. "He who seeketh after
  riches," quoth she, "to avoid want, taketh no thought for power, he had
  rather be base and obscure, he depriveth himself even of many natural
  pleasures that he may not lose the money which he hath gotten. But by
  this means he attaineth not to sufficiency, whom power forsaketh, whom
  trouble molesteth, whom baseness maketh abject, whom obscurity
  overwhelmeth. Again, he that only desireth power, consumeth wealth,
  despiseth pleasures, and setteth light by honour or glory, which is not
  potent. But thou seest how many things are wanting to this man also. For
  sometimes he wanteth necessaries, and is perplexed with anxieties, and
  being not able to rid himself, ceaseth to be powerful, which was the
  only thing he aimed at. The like discourse may be made of honours,
  glory, pleasures. For since every one of these things is the same with
  the rest, whosoever seeketh for any of them without the rest obtaineth
  not that which he desireth." "What then?" quoth I. "If one should desire
  to have them all together, he should wish for the sum of happiness, but
  shall he find it in these things which we have showed cannot perform
  what they promise?" "No," quoth I. "Wherefore we must by no means seek
  for happiness in these things which are thought to afford the several
  portions of that which is to be desired." "I confess it," quoth I, "and
  nothing can be more true than this." "Now then," quoth she, "thou hast
  both the form and causes of false felicity; cast but the eyes of thy
  mind on the contrary, and thou shalt presently espy true happiness,
  which we promised to show thee." "This," quoth I, "is evident, even to
  him that is blind, and thou showedst it a little before, while thou
  endeavouredst to lay open the causes of the false. For, if I be not
  deceived, that is true and perfect happiness which maketh a man
  sufficient, potent, respected, famous, joyful. And that thou mayest know
  that I understood thee aright, that which can truly perform any one of
  these because they are all one, I acknowledge to be full and perfect
  happiness." "O my scholar, I think thee happy by having this opinion, if
  thou addest this also." "What?" quoth I. "Dost thou imagine that there
  is any mortal or frail thing which can cause this happy estate?" "I do
  not," quoth I, "and that hath been so proved by thee, that more cannot
  be desired." "Wherefore these things seem to afford men the images of
  the true good, or certain unperfect goods, but they cannot give them the
  true and perfect good itself." "I am of the same mind," quoth I. "Now
  then, since thou knowest wherein true happiness consisteth, and what
  have only a false show of it, it remaineth that thou shouldst learn
  where thou mayest seek for this which is true." "This is that," quoth I,
  "which I have long earnestly expected." "But since, as Plato teacheth
  (in Timaeus),[ ] we must implore God's assistance even in our least
  affairs, what, thinkest thou, must we do now, that we may deserve to
  find the seat of that sovereign good?" "We must," quoth I, "invocate the
  Father of all things, without whose remembrance no beginning hath a good
  foundation." "Thou sayest rightly," quoth she, and withal sung in this
  sort.


  [ ] Cf. _Tim._  .




IX.

"O qui perpetua mundum ratione gubernas
Terrarum caelique sator qui tempus ab aeuo
Ire iubes stabilisque manens das cuncta moueri.
Quem non externae pepulerunt fingere causae
Materiae fluitantis opus, uerum insita summi                               
Forma boni liuore carens, tu cuncta superno
Ducis ab exemplo, pulchrum pulcherrimus ipse
Mundum mente gerens similique in imagine formans
Perfectasque iubens perfectum absoluere partes.
Tu numeris elementa ligas ut frigora flammis                              
Arida conueniant liquidis, ne purior ignis
Euolet aut mersas deducant pondera terras.
Tu triplicis mediam naturae cuncta mouentem
Conectens animam per consona membra resoluis.
Quae cum secta duos motum glomerauit in orbes,                            
In semet reditura meat mentemque profundam
Circuit et simili conuertit imagine caelum.
Tu causis animas paribus uitasque minores
Prouehis et leuibus sublimes curribus aptans
In caelum terramque seris quas lege benigna                               
Ad te conuersas reduci facis igne reuerti.
Da pater augustam menti conscendere sedem,
Da fontem lustrare boni, da luce reperta
In te conspicuos animi defigere uisus.
Dissice terrenae nebulas et pondera molis                                 
Atque tuo splendore mica! Tu namque serenum,
Tu requies tranquilla piis, te cernere finis,
Principium, uector, dux, semita, terminus idem.




  IX.[ ]

  "O Thou, that dost the world in lasting order guide,
  Father of heaven and earth, Who makest time swiftly slide,
  And, standing still Thyself, yet fram'st all moving laws,
  Who to Thy work wert moved by no external cause:
  But by a sweet desire, where envy hath no place,
  Thy goodness moving Thee to give each thing his grace,
  Thou dost all creatures' forms from highest patterns take,
  From Thy fair mind the world fair like Thyself doth make.
  Thus Thou perfect the whole perfect each part dost frame.
  Thou temp'rest elements, making cold mixed with flame
  And dry things join with moist, lest fire away should fly,
  Or earth, opprest with weight, buried too low should lie.
  Thou in consenting parts fitly disposed hast
  Th'all-moving soul in midst of threefold nature placed,
  Which, cut in several parts that run a different race,
  Into itself returns, and circling doth embrace
  The highest mind, and heaven with like proportion drives.
  Thou with like cause dost make the souls and lesser lives,
  Fix them in chariots swift, and widely scatterest
  O'er heaven and earth; then at Thy fatherly behest
  They stream, like fire returning, back to Thee, their God.
  Dear Father, let my mind Thy hallowed seat ascend,
  Let me behold the spring of grace and find Thy light,
  That I on Thee may fix my soul's well clearéd sight.
  Cast off the earthly weight wherewith I am opprest,
  Shine as Thou art most bright, Thou only calm and rest
  To pious men whose end is to behold Thy ray,
  Who their beginning art, their guide, their bound, and way.[ ]


  [ ] This poem is a masterly abridgment of the first part of the
  _Timaeus_, and was eagerly fastened on by commentators of the early
  Middle Ages whose direct knowledge of Plato was confined to the
  translation of that dialogue by Chalcidius.

  [ ] Cf. the string of nouns in _Tr._ iv. (_supra_, p.   _ad fin._).




X.

Quoniam igitur quae sit imperfecti, quae etiam perfecti boni forma uidisti,
nunc demonstrandum reor quonam haec felicitatis perfectio constituta sit.
In quo illud primum arbitror inquirendum, an aliquod huiusmodi bonum quale
paulo ante definisti in rerum natura possit exsistere, ne nos praeter rei
subiectae ueritatem cassa cogitationis imago decipiat. Sed quin exsistat
sitque hoc ueluti quidam omnium fons bonorum negari nequit. Omne enim quod
inperfectum esse dicitur, id inminutione perfecti inperfectum esse
perhibetur. Quo fit, ut si in quolibet genere inperfectum quid esse
uideatur, in eo perfectum quoque aliquid esse necesse sit. Etenim
perfectione sublata, unde illud quod inperfectum perhibetur exstiterit ne
fingi quidem potest. Neque enim ab deminutis inconsummatisque natura rerum
coepit exordium, sed ab integris absolutisque procedens in haec extrema
atque effeta dilabitur. Quod si, uti paulo ante monstrauimus, est quaedam
boni fragilis inperfecta felicitas, esse aliquam solidam perfectamque non
potest dubitari." "Firmissime," inquam, "uerissimeque conclusum est." "Quo
uero," inquit, "habitet, ita considera. Deum rerum omnium principem bonum
esse communis humanorum conceptio probat animorum. Nam cum nihil deo melius
excogitari queat, id quo melius nihil est bonum esse quis dubitet? Ita uero
bonum esse deum ratio demonstrat, ut perfectum quoque in eo bonum esse
conuincat. Nam ni tale sit, rerum omnium princeps esse non poterit. Erit
enim eo praestantius aliquid perfectum possidens bonum, quod hoc prius
atque antiquius esse uideatur; omnia namque perfecta minus integris priora
esse claruerunt. Quare ne in infinitum ratio prodeat, confitendum est
summum deum summi perfectique boni esse plenissimum. Sed perfectum bonum
ueram esse beatitudinem constituimus; ueram igitur beatitudinem in summo
deo sitam esse necesse est." "Accipio," inquam, "nec est quod contradici
ullo modo queat." "Sed quaeso," inquit, "te uide quam id sancte atque
inuiolabiliter probes quod boni summi summum deum diximus esse
plenissimum." "Quonam," inquam, "modo?" "Ne hunc rerum omnium patrem illud
summum bonum quo plenus esse perhibetur uel extrinsecus accepisse uel ita
naturaliter habere praesumas, quasi habentis dei habitaeque beatitudinis
diuersam cogites esse substantiam. Nam si extrinsecus acceptum putes,
praestantius id quod dederit ab eo quod acceperit existimare possis. Sed
hunc esse rerum omnium praecellentissimum dignissime confitemur. Quod si
natura quidem inest, sed est ratione diuersum, cum de rerum principe
loquamur deo, fingat qui potest: quis haec diuersa coniunxerit? Postremo
quod a qualibet re diuersum est, id non est illud a quo intellegitur esse
diuersum. Quare quod a summo bono diuersum est sui natura, id summum bonum
non est--quod nefas est de eo cogitare quo nihil constat esse praestantius.
Omnino enim nullius rei natura suo principio melior poterit exsistere,
quare quod omnium principium sit, id etiam sui substantia summum esse bonum
uerissima ratione concluserim." "Rectissime," inquam. "Sed summum bonum
beatitudinem esse concessum est." "Ita est," inquam. "Igitur," inquit,
"deum esse ipsam beatitudinem necesse est confiteri." "Nec propositis,"
inquam, "prioribus refragari queo et illis hoc inlatum consequens esse
perspicio."

"Respice," inquit, "an hinc quoque idem firmius approbetur, quod duo summa
bona quae a se diuersa sint esse non possunt. Etenim quae discrepant bona,
non esse alterum quod sit alterum liquet; quare neutrum poterit esse
perfectum, cum alterutri alterum deest. Sed quod perfectum non sit, id
summum non esse manifestum est; nullo modo igitur quae summa sunt bona ea
possunt esse diuersa. Atqui et beatitudinem et deum summum bonum esse
collegimus; quare ipsam necesse est summam esse beatitudinem quae sit summa
diuinitas." "Nihil," inquam, "nec reapse uerius[ ] nec ratiocinatione
firmius nec deo dignius concludi potest." "Super haec," inquit, "igitur
ueluti geometrae solent demonstratis propositis aliquid inferre quae
porismata ipsi uocant, ita ego quoque tibi ueluti corollarium dabo. Nam
quoniam beatitudinis adeptione fiunt homines beati, beatitudo uero est ipsa
diuinitas, diuinitatis adeptione beatos fieri manifestum est: sed uti
iustitiae adeptione iusti, sapientiae sapientes fiunt, ita diuinitatem
adeptos deos fieri simili ratione necesse est. Omnis igitur beatus deus,
sed natura quidem unus; participatione uero nihil prohibet esse quam
plurimos." "Et pulchrum," inquam, "hoc atque pretiosum, siue porisma siue
corollarium uocari mauis." "Atqui hoc quoque pulchrius nihil est, quod his
annectendum esse ratio persuadet." "Quid?" inquam.

"Cum multa," inquit, "beatitudo continere uideatur, utrumne haec omnia unum
ueluti corpus beatitudinis quadam partium uarietate coniungant an sit eorum
aliquid quod beatitudinis substantiam compleat, ad hoc uero cetera
referantur?" "Vellem," inquam, "id ipsarum rerum commemoratione
patefaceres." "Nonne," inquit, "beatitudinem bonum esse censemus?" "Ac
summum quidem," inquam. "Addas," inquit, "hoc omnibus licet. Nam eadem
sufficientia summa est, eadem summa potentia, reuerentia quoque, claritas
ac uoluptas beatitudo esse iudicatur. Quid igitur? Haecine omnia
bonum--sufficientia potentia ceteraque--ueluti quaedam beatitudinis membra
sunt an ad bonum ueluti ad uerticem cuncta referuntur?" "Intellego,"
inquam, "quid inuestigandum proponas, sed quid constituas audire desidero."
"Cuius discretionem rei sic accipe. Si haec omnia beatitudinis membra
forent, a se quoque inuicem discreparent. Haec est enim partium natura ut
unum corpus diuersa componant. Atqui haec omnia idem esse monstrata sunt;
minime igitur membra sunt. Alioquin ex uno membro beatitudo uidebitur esse
coniuncta--quod fieri nequit." "Id quidem," inquam, "dubium non est, sed
id quod restat exspecto." "Ad bonum uero cetera referri palam est. Idcirco
enim sufficientia petitur quoniam bonum esse iudicatur, idcirco potentia
quoniam id quoque esse creditur bonum; idem de reuerentia, claritudine,
iucunditate coniectare licet. Omnium igitur expetendorum summa atque causa
bonum est. Quod enim neque re neque similitudine ullum in se retinet bonum,
id expeti nullo modo potest. Contraque etiam quae natura bona non sunt,
tamen si esse uideantur, quasi uere bona sint appetuntur. Quo fit uti
summa, cardo atque causa expetendorum omnium bonitas esse iure credatur.
Cuius uero causa quid expetitur, id maxime uidetur optari, ueluti si
salutis causa quispiam uelit equitare, non tam equitandi motum desiderat
quam salutis effectum. Cum igitur omnia boni gratia petantur, non illa
potius quam bonum ipsum desideratur ab omnibus. Sed propter quod cetera
optantur, beatitudinem esse concessimus; quare sic quoque sola quaeritur
beatitudo. Ex quo liquido apparet ipsius boni et beatitudinis unam atque
eandem esse substantiam." "Nihil uideo cur dissentire quispiam possit."
"Sed deum ueramque beatitudinem unum atque idem esse monstrauimus." "Ita,"
inquam. "Securo igitur concludere licet dei quoque in ipso bono nec usquam
alio sitam esse substantiam.


[ ] reapse uerius _Schepss_: re ab seuerius _uel_ re ipsa uerius _codd.
opt._




  X.

  Wherefore since thou hast seen what is the form of perfect and imperfect
  good, now I think we must show in what this perfection of happiness is
  placed. And inquire first whether there can be any such good extant in
  the world, as thou hast defined; lest, contrary to truth, we be deceived
  with an empty show of thought. But it cannot be denied that there is
  some such thing extant which is as it were the fountain of all goodness.
  For all that is said to be imperfect is so termed for the want it hath
  of perfection. Whence it followeth that if in any kind we find something
  imperfect, there must needs be something perfect also in the same kind.
  For if we take away perfection we cannot so much as devise how there
  should be any imperfection. For the nature of things began not from that
  which is defective and not complete, but, proceeding from entire and
  absolute, falleth into that which is extreme and enfeebled. But if, as
  we showed before, there be a certain imperfect felicity of frail goods,
  it cannot be doubted but that there is some solid and perfect happiness
  also." "Thou hast," quoth I, "concluded most firmly and most truly."
  "Now where this good dwelleth," quoth she, "consider this. The common
  conceit of men's minds proveth that God the Prince of all things is
  good. For, since nothing can be imagined better than God, who doubteth
  but that is good than which is nothing better? And reason doth in such
  sort demonstrate God to be good that it convinceth Him to be perfectly
  good. For unless He were so, He could not be the chief of all things.
  For there would be something better than He, having perfect goodness,
  which could seem to be of greater antiquity and eminence than He. For it
  is already manifest that perfect things were before the imperfect.
  Wherefore, lest our reasoning should have no end, we must confess that
  the Sovereign God is most full of sovereign and perfect goodness. But we
  have concluded that perfect goodness is true happiness, wherefore true
  blessedness must necessarily be placed in the most high God." "I agree,"
  quoth I, "neither can this be any way contradicted." "But I pray thee,"
  quoth she, "see how boldly and inviolably thou approvest that which we
  said, that the Sovereign God is most full of sovereign goodness." "How?"
  quoth I. "That thou presumest not that this Father of all things hath
  either received from others that sovereign good with which He is said to
  be replenished, or hath it naturally in such sort that thou shouldst
  think that the substance of the blessedness which is had, and of God who
  hath it, were diverse. For if thou thinkest that He had it from others,
  thou mayest also infer that he who gave it was better than the receiver.
  But we most worthily confess that He is the most excellent of all
  things. And if He hath it by nature, but as a diverse thing, since we
  speak of God the Prince of all things, let him that can, invent who
  united these diverse things. Finally, that which is different from
  anything, is not that from which it is understood to differ. Wherefore
  that which is naturally different from the sovereign good, is not the
  sovereign good itself. Which it were impious to think of God, than whom,
  we know certainly, nothing is better. For doubtless the nature of
  nothing can be better than the beginning of it. Wherefore I may most
  truly conclude that which is the beginning of all things to be also in
  His own substance the chiefest good." "Most rightly," quoth I. "But it
  is granted that the chiefest good is blessedness?" "It is," quoth I.
  "Wherefore," quoth she, "we must needs confess that blessedness itself
  is God." "I can neither contradict," quoth I, "thy former propositions,
  and I see this illation followeth from them."

  "Consider," saith she, "if the same be not more firmly proved hence,
  because there cannot be two chief goods, the one different from the
  other. For it is manifest that of those goods which differ, the one is
  not the other, wherefore neither of them can be perfect, wanting the
  other. But manifestly that which is not perfect, is not the chiefest,
  wherefore the chief goods cannot be diverse. Now we have proved that
  both blessedness and God are the chiefest good, wherefore that must
  needs be the highest blessedness which is the highest divinity." "There
  can be nothing," quoth I, "concluded more truly than this, nor more
  firmly in arguing, nor more worthy God himself." "Upon this then," quoth
  she, "as the geometricians[ ] are wont, out of their propositions
  which they have demonstrated, to infer something which they call
  _porismata_ (deductions) so will I give thee as it were a
  _corollarium_. For since that men are made blessed by the obtaining
  of blessedness, and blessedness is nothing else but divinity, it is
  manifest that men are made blessed by the obtaining of divinity. And as
  men are made just by the obtaining of justice, and wise by the obtaining
  of wisdom, so they who obtain divinity must needs in like manner become
  gods. Wherefore everyone that is blessed is a god, but by nature there
  is only one God; but there may be many by participation." "This is,"
  quoth I, "an excellent and precious _porisma_ or
  _corollarium_." "But there is nothing more excellent than that
  which reason persuadeth us to add." "What?" quoth I.

  "Since," quoth she, "blessedness seemeth to contain many things, whether
  do they all concur as divers parts to the composition of one entire body
  of blessedness, or doth some one of them form the substance of
  blessedness to which the rest are to be referred?" "I desire," quoth I,
  "that thou wouldst declare this point, by the enumeration of the
  particulars." "Do we not think," quoth she, "that blessedness is good?"
  "Yea, the chiefest good," quoth I. "Thou mayest," quoth she, "add this
  to them all. For blessedness is accounted the chiefest sufficiency, the
  chiefest power, respect, fame, and pleasure. What then? Are all these--
  sufficiency, power, and the rest--the good, in the sense that they are
  members of it, or rather are they referred to good as to the head?" "I
  understand," quoth I, "what thou proposest, but I desire to hear what
  thou concludest." "This is the decision of this matter. If all these
  were members of blessedness, they should differ one from another. For
  this is the nature of parts, that being divers they compose one body.
  But we have proved that all these are one and the same thing. Wherefore
  they are no members, otherwise blessedness should be compacted of one
  member, which cannot be." "There is no doubt of this," quoth I, "but I
  expect that which is behind." "It is manifest that the rest are to be
  referred to goodness; for sufficiency is desired, because it is esteemed
  good, and likewise power, because that likewise is thought to be good.
  And we may conjecture the same of respect, fame, and pleasure. Wherefore
  goodness is the sum and cause of all that is desired. For that which is
  neither good indeed, nor beareth any show of goodness, can by no means
  be sought after. And contrariwise those things which are not good of
  their own nature, yet, if they seem such, are desired as if they were
  truly good. So that the sum, origin, and cause of all that is sought
  after is rightly thought to be goodness. And that on account of which a
  thing is sought, seemeth to be the chief object of desire. As if one
  would ride for his health, he doth not so much desire the motion of
  riding, as the effect of health. Wherefore, since all things are desired
  in respect of goodness, they are not so much wished for as goodness
  itself. But we granted that to be blessedness for which other things are
  desired, wherefore in like manner only blessedness is sought after; by
  which it plainly appeareth, that goodness and blessedness have one and
  the self-same substance." "I see not how any man can dissent." "But we
  have showed that God and true blessedness are one and the self-same
  thing." "It is so," quoth I. "We may then securely conclude that the
  substance of God consisteth in nothing else but in goodness.


  [ ] _Vide supra_, _Tr_. iii. p.  .




X.

Huc omnes pariter uenite capti
Quos fallax ligat improbis catenis
Terrenas habitans libido mentes,
Haec erit uobis requies laborum,
Hic portus placida manens quiete,                                          
Hoc patens unum miseris asylum,
Non quidquid Tagus aureis harenis
Donat aut Hermus rutilante ripa
Aut Indus calido propinquus orbi
Candidis miscens uirides lapillos,                                        
Inlustrent aciem magisque caecos
In suas condunt animos tenebras.
Hoc quidquid placet excitatque mentes,
Infimis tellus aluit cauernis;
Splendor quo regitur uigetque caelum,                                     
Vitat obscuras animae ruinas.
Hanc quisquis poterit notare lucem,
Candidos Phoebi radios negabit."




  X.[ ]

    Come hither, all you that are bound,
    Whose base and earthly minds are drowned
  By lust which doth them tie in cruel chains:
    Here is a seat for men opprest,
    Here is a port of pleasant rest;
  Here may a wretch have refuge from his pains.
    No gold, which Tagus' sands bestow,
    Nor which on Hermus' banks doth flow,
  Nor precious stones which scorched Indians get[ ],
    Can clear the sharpness of the mind,
    But rather make it far more blind,
  And in the farther depth of darkness set.
    For this that sets our souls on work
    Buried in caves of earth doth lurk.
  But heaven is guided by another light,
    Which causeth us to shun the dark[ ],
    And who this light doth truly mark,
  Must needs deny that Phoebus' beams are bright."


  [ ] For the discussion on the nature of good in this poem and the next
  piece of prose cf. _supra_, pp.   ff.

  [ ] Literally, "Nor Indus, neighbour of the torrid zone, blending its
  green and white pebbles."

  [ ] Literally, "The light which gives guidance and vigour to the sky
  shuns the darkness of ruined minds."




XI.

"Assentior," inquam, "cuncta enim firmissimis nexa rationibus constant."
Tum illa, "Quanti," inquit, "aestimabis, si bonum ipsum quid sit
agnoueris?" "Infinito," inquam, "si quidem mihi pariter deum quoque qui
bonum est continget agnoscere." "Atqui hoc uerissima," inquit, "ratione
patefaciam, maneant modo quae paulo ante conclusa sunt." "Manebunt."
"Nonne," inquit, "monstrauimus ea quae appetuntur pluribus idcirco uera
perfectaque bona non esse quoniam a se inuicem discreparent cumque alteri
abesset alterum, plenum absolutumque bonum afferre non posse? Tum autem
uerum bonum fieri cum in unam ueluti formam atque efficientiam colliguntur,
ut quae sufficientia est, eadem sit potentia, reuerentia, claritas atque
iucunditas, nisi uero unum atque idem omnia sint, nihil habere quo inter
expetenda numerentur?" "Demonstratum," inquam, "nec dubitari ullo modo
potest." "Quae igitur cum discrepant minime bona sunt, cum uero unum esse
coeperint, bona fiunt; nonne haec ut bona sint, unitatis fieri adeptione
contingit?" "Ita," inquam, "uidetur." "Sed omne quod bonum est boni
participatione bonum esse concedis an minime?" "Ita est." "Oportet igitur
idem esse unum atque bonum simili ratione concedas; eadem namque substantia
est eorum quorum naturaliter non est diuersus effectus." "Negare," inquam,
"nequeo." "Nostine igitur," inquit, "omne quod est tam diu manere atque
subsistere quam diu sit unum, sed interire atque dissolui pariter atque
unum destiterit?" "Quonam modo?" "Vt in animalibus," inquit, "cum in unum
coeunt ac permanent anima corpusque, id animal uocatur; cum uero haec
unitas utriusque separatione dissoluitur, interire nec iam esse animal
liquet. Ipsum quoque corpus cum in una forma membrorum coniunctione
permanet, humana uisitur species; at si distributae segregataeque partes
corporis distraxerint unitatem, desinit esse quod fuerat. Eoque modo
percurrenti cetera procul dubio patebit subsistere unumquodque, dum unum
est, cum uero unum esse desinit, interire." "Consideranti," inquam, "mihi
plura minime aliud uidetur." "Estne igitur," inquit, "quod in quantum
naturaliter agat relicta subsistendi appetentia uenire ad interitum
corruptionemque desideret?"  "Si animalia," inquam, "considerem quae habent
aliquam uolendi nolendique naturam, nihil inuenio quod nullis extra
cogentibus abiciant manendi intentionem et ad interitum sponte festinent.
Omne namque animal tueri salutem laborat, mortem uero perniciemque deuitat.
Sed quid de herbis arboribusque, quid de inanimatis omnino consentiam rebus
prorsus dubito."

"Atqui non est quod de hoc quoque possis ambigere, cum herbas atque arbores
intuearis primum sibi conuenientibus innasci locis, ubi quantum earum
natura queat cito exarescere atque interire non possint. Nam aliae quidem
campis aliae montibus oriuntur, alias ferunt paludes, aliae saxis haerent,
aliarum fecundae sunt steriles harenae, quas si in alia quispiam loca
transferre conetur, arescant. Sed dat cuique natura quod conuenit et ne,
dum manere possunt, intereant, elaborat. Quid quod omnes uelut in terras
ore demerso trahunt alimenta radicibus ac per medullas robur corticemque
diffundunt? Quid quod mollissimum quidque, sicuti medulla est, interiore
semper sede reconditur, extra uero quadam ligni firmitate, ultimus autem
cortex aduersum caeli intemperiem quasi mali patiens defensor opponitur?
Iam uero quanta est naturae diligentia, ut cuncta semine multiplicato
propagentur! Quae omnia non modo ad tempus manendi uerum generatim quoque
quasi in perpetuum permanendi ueluti quasdam machinas esse quis nesciat? Ea
etiam quae inanimata esse creduntur nonne quod suum est quaeque simili
ratione desiderant? Cur enim flammas quidem sursum leuitas uehit, terras
uero deorsum pondus deprimit, nisi quod haec singulis loca motionesque
conueniunt? Porro autem quod cuique consentaneum est, id unumquodque
conseruat, sicuti ea quae sunt inimica corrumpunt. Iam uero quae dura sunt
ut lapides, adhaerent tenacissime partibus suis et ne facile dissoluantur
resistunt. Quae uero liquentia ut aer atque aqua, facile quidem
diuidentibus cedunt, sed cito in ea rursus a quibus sunt abscisa
relabuntur, ignis uero omnem refugit sectionem. Neque nunc nos de
uoluntariis animae cognoscentis motibus, sed de naturali intentione
tractamus, sicuti est quod acceptas escas sine cogitatione transigimus,
quod in somno spiritum ducimus nescientes; nam ne in animalibus quidem
manendi amor ex animae uoluntatibus, uerum ex naturae principiis uenit. Nam
saepe mortem cogentibus causis quam natura reformidat uoluntas amplectitur,
contraque illud quo solo mortalium rerum durat diuturnitas gignendi opus,
quod natura semper appetit, interdum coercet uoluntas. Adeo haec sui
caritas non ex animali motione sed ex naturali intentione procedit. Dedit
enim prouidentia creatis a se rebus hanc uel maximam manendi causam ut
quoad possunt naturaliter manere desiderent; quare nihil est quod ullo modo
queas dubitare cuncta quae sunt appetere naturaliter constantiam
permanendi, deuitare perniciem."

"Confiteor," inquam, "nunc me indubitato cernere quae dudum incerta
uidebantur." "Quod autem," inquit, "subsistere ac permanere petit, id unum
esse desiderat; hoc enim sublato ne esse quidem cuiquam permanebit." "Verum
est," inquam. "Omnia igitur," inquit, "unum desiderant." Consensi. "Sed
unum id ipsum monstrauimus esse quod bonum." "Ita quidem." "Cuncta igitur
bonum petunt, quod quidem ita describas licet: ipsum bonum esse quod
desideretur ab omnibus." "Nihil," inquam, "uerius excogitari potest. Nam
uel ad nihil unum cuncta referuntur et uno ueluti uertice destituta sine
rectore fluitabunt, aut si quid est ad quod uniuersa festinent, id erit
omnium summum bonorum." Et illa: "Nimium," inquit, "o alumne laetor, ipsam
enim mediae ueritatis notam mente fixisti. Sed in hoc patuit tibi quod
ignorare te paulo ante dicebas." "Quid?" inquam. "Quis esset," inquit,
"rerum omnium finis. Is est enim profecto, quod desideratur ab omnibus,
quod quia bonum esse collegimus, oportet rerum omnium finem bonum esse
fateamur.




  XI.

  "I consent," quoth I, "for all is grounded upon most firm reasons." "But
  what account wilt thou make," quoth she, "to know what goodness itself
  is?" "I will esteem it infinitely," quoth I, "because by this means I
  shall come to know God also, who is nothing else but goodness." "I will
  conclude this," quoth she, "most certainly, if those things be not
  denied which I have already proved." "They shall not," quoth I. "Have we
  not proved," quoth she, "that those things which are desired of many,
  are not true and perfect goods, because they differ one from another
  and, being separated, cannot cause complete and absolute goodness, which
  is only found when they are united as it were into one form and
  causality, that the same may be sufficiency, power, respect, fame, and
  pleasure? And except they be all one and the same thing, that they have
  nothing worth the desiring?" "It hath been proved," quoth I, "neither
  can it be any way doubted of." "Those things, then, which, when they
  differ, are not good and when they are one, become good, are they not
  made good by obtaining unity?" "So methink," quoth I. "But dost thou
  grant that all that is good is good by partaking goodness?" "It is so."
  "Thou must grant then likewise that unity and goodness are the same. For
  those things have the same substance, which naturally have not diverse
  effects." "I cannot deny it," quoth I. "Knowest thou then," quoth she,
  "that everything that is doth so long remain and subsist as it is one,
  and perisheth and is dissolved so soon as it ceaseth to be one?" "How?"
  "As in living creatures," quoth she, "so long as the body and soul
  remain united, the living creature remaineth. But when this unity is
  dissolved by their separation, it is manifest that it perisheth, and is
  no longer a living creature. The body also itself, so long as it
  remaineth in one form by the conjunction of the parts, appeareth the
  likeness of a man. But if the members of the body, being separated and
  sundered, have lost their unity, it is no longer the same. And in like
  manner it will be manifest to him that will descend to other
  particulars, that everything continueth so long as it is one, and
  perisheth when it loseth unity." "Considering more particulars, I find
  it to be no otherwise." "Is there anything," quoth she, "that in the
  course of nature, leaving the desire of being, seeketh to come to
  destruction and corruption?" "If," quoth I, "I consider living creatures
  which have any nature to will and nill, I find nothing that without
  extern compulsion forsake the intention to remain, and of their own
  accord hasten to destruction. For every living creature laboureth to
  preserve his health, and escheweth death and detriment. But what I
  should think of herbs, and trees, and of all things without life, I am
  altogether doubtful."

  "But there is no cause why thou shouldst doubt of this, if thou
  considerest first that herbs and trees grow in places agreeable to their
  nature, where, so much as their constitution permitteth, they cannot
  soon wither and perish. For some grow in fields, other upon hills, some
  in fenny, other in stony places, and the barren sands are fertile for
  some, which if thou wouldst transplant into other places they die. But
  nature giveth every one that which is fitting, and striveth to keep them
  from decaying so long as they can remain. What should I tell thee, if
  all of them, thrusting as it were their lips into the ground, draw
  nourishment by their roots, and convey substance and bark by the inward
  pith? What, that always the softest, as the pith, is placed within, and
  is covered without by the strength of the wood, and last of all the bark
  is exposed to the weather, as being best able to bear it off? And how
  great is the diligence of nature that all things may continue by the
  multiplication of seed; all which who knoweth not to be, as it were,
  certain engines, not only to remain for a time, but successively in a
  manner to endure for ever? Those things also which are thought to be
  without all life, doth not every one in like manner desire that which
  appertaineth to their own good? For why doth levity lift up flames, or
  heaviness weigh down the earth, but because these places and motions are
  convenient for them? And that which is agreeable to everything
  conserveth it, as that which is opposite causeth corruption. Likewise
  those things which are hard, as stones, stick most firmly to their
  parts, and make great resistance to any dissolution. And liquid things,
  as air and water, are indeed easily divided, but do easily also join
  again. And fire flieth all division. Neither do we now treat of the
  voluntary motions of the understanding soul, but only of natural
  operations. Of which sort is, to digest that which we have eaten,
  without thinking of it, to breathe in our sleep not thinking what we do.
  For even in living creatures the love of life proceedeth not from the
  will of the soul, but from the principles of nature. For the will many
  times embraceth death upon urgent occasions, which nature abhorreth; and
  contrariwise the act of generation, by which alone the continuance of
  mortal things is maintained, is sometimes bridled by the will, though
  nature doth always desire it. So true it is that this self-love
  proceedeth not from any voluntary motion, but from natural intention.
  For providence gave to her creatures this as the greatest cause of
  continuance, that they naturally desire to continue so long as they may,
  wherefore there is no cause why thou shouldst any way doubt that all
  things which are desire naturally stability of remaining, and eschew
  corruption."

  "I confess," quoth I, "that I now see undoubtedly that which before
  seemed very doubtful." "Now that," quoth she, "which desireth to
  continue and remain seeketh to have unity. For if this be taken away,
  being itself cannot remain." "It is true," quoth I. "All things then,"
  quoth she, "desire unity." I granted it to be so. "But we have showed
  that unity is the same as goodness." "You have indeed." "All things then
  desire goodness, which thou mayest define thus: Goodness is that which
  is desired of all things." "There can be nothing imagined more true. For
  either all things have reference to no one principle and, being
  destitute as it were of one head, shall be in confusion without any
  ruler: or if there be anything to which all things hasten, that must be
  the chiefest of all goods." "I rejoice greatly O scholar," quoth she,
  "for thou hast fixed in thy mind the very mark of verity. But in this
  thou hast discovered that which a little before thou saidest thou wert
  ignorant of." "What is that?" quoth I. "What the end of all things is,"
  quoth she. "For certainly it is that which is desired of all things,
  which since we have concluded to be goodness, we must also confess that
  goodness is the end of all things.




XI.

Quisquis profunda mente uestigat uerum
Cupitque nullis ille deuiis falli,
In se reuoluat intimi lucem uisus
Longosque in orbem cogat inflectens motus
Animumque doceat quidquid extra molitur                                    
Suis retrusum possidere thesauris.
Dudum quod atra texit erroris nubes
Lucebit ipso perspicacius Phoebo.
Non omne namque mente depulit lumen
Obliuiosam corpus inuehens molem.                                         
Haeret profecto semen introrsum ueri
Quod excitatur uentilante doctrina.
Nam cur rogati sponte recta censetis,
Ni mersus alto uiueret fomes corde?
Quod si Platonis Musa personat uerum,                                     
Quod quisque discit immemor recordatur."




  XI.

  He that would seek the truth with thoughts profound
  And would not stray in ways that are not right,
  He to himself must turn his inward sight,
  And guide his motions in a circled round,
  Teaching his mind that ever she design
  Herself in her own treasures to possess:
  So that which late lay hidden in cloudiness
  More bright and clear than Phoebus' beams shall shine.
  Flesh hath not quenched all the spirit's light,
  Though this oblivion's lump holds her opprest.
  Some seed of truth remaineth in our breast,
  Which skilful learning eas'ly doth excite.
  For being askt how can we answer true
  Unless that grace within our hearts did dwell?
  If Plato's heavenly muse the truth us tell,
  We learning things remember them anew."[ ]


  [ ] For Plato's doctrine of Reminiscence cf. _Meno_  - , and
  _Phaedo_  - .



XII.

Tum ego: "Platoni," inquam, "uehementer assentior, nam me horum iam secundo
commemoras, primum quod memoriam corporea contagione, dehinc cum maeroris
mole pressus amisi." Tum illa: "Si priora," inquit, "concessa respicias, ne
illud quidem longius aberit quin recorderis quod te dudum nescire confessus
es." "Quid?" inquam. "Quibus," ait illa, "gubernaculis mundus regatur."
"Memini," inquam, "me inscitiam meam fuisse confessum, sed quid afferas,
licet iam prospiciam, planius tamen ex te audire desidero." "Mundum,"
inquit, "hunc deo regi paulo ante minime dubitandum putabas." "Ne nunc
quidem arbitror," inquam, "nec umquam dubitandum putabo quibusque in hoc
rationibus accedam breuiter exponam. Mundus hic ex tam diuersis
contrariisque partibus in unam formam minime conuenisset, nisi unus esset
qui tam diuersa coniungeret. Coniuncta uero naturarum ipsa diuersitas
inuicem discors dissociaret atque diuelleret, nisi unus esset qui quod
nexuit contineret. Non tam uero certus naturae ordo procederet nec tam
dispositos motus locis, temporibus, efficientia, spatiis, qualitatibus
explicarent, nisi unus esset qui has mutationum uarietates manens ipse
disponeret.  Hoc quidquid est quo condita manent atque agitantur, usitato
cunctis uocabulo deum nomino."

Tum illa: "Cum haec," inquit, "ita sentias, paruam mihi restare operam puto
ut felicitatis compos patriam sospes reuisas. Sed quae proposuimus
intueamur. Nonne in beatitudine sufficientiam numerauimus deumque
beatitudinem ipsam esse consensimus?" "Ita quidem." "Et ad mundum igitur,"
inquit, "regendum nullis extrinsecus adminiculis indigebit; alioquin si quo
egeat, plenam sufficientiam non habebit." "Id," inquam, "ita est
necessarium." "Per se igitur solum cuncta disponit." "Negari," inquam,
"nequit." "Atqui deus ipsum bonum esse monstratus est." "Memini," inquam.
"Per bonum igitur cuncta disponit, si quidem per se regit omnia quem bonum
esse consensimus et hic est ueluti quidam clauus atque gubernaculum quo
mundana machina stabilis atque incorrupta seruatur." "Vehementer
assentior," inquam, "et id te paulo ante dicturam tenui licet suspicione
prospexi." "Credo;" inquit, "iam enim ut arbitror uigilantius ad cernenda
uera oculos deducis. Sed quod dicam non minus ad contuendum patet." "Quid?"
inquam. "Cum deus," inquit, "omnia bonitatis clauo gubernare iure credatur
eademque omnia sicuti docui ad bonum naturali intentione festinent, num
dubitari potest quin uoluntaria regantur seque ad disponentis nutum ueluti
conuenientia contemperataque rectori sponte conuertant?" "Ita," inquam,
"necesse est; nec beatum regimen esse uideretur, si quidem detrectantium
iugum foret, non obtemperantium salus." "Nihil est igitur quod naturam
seruans deo contraire conetur." "Nihil," inquam. "Quod si conetur," ait,
"num tandem proficiet quidquam aduersus eum quem iure beatitudinis
potentissimum esse concessimus?" "Prorsus," inquam, "nihil ualeret." "Non
est igitur aliquid quod summo huic bono uel uelit uel possit obsistere."
"Non," inquam, "arbitror." "Est igitur summum," inquit, "bonum quod regit
cuncta fortiter suauiterque disponit." Tum ego: "Quam," inquam, "me non
modo ea quae conclusa est summa rationum, uerum multo magis haec ipsa
quibus uteris uerba delectant, ut tandem aliquando stultitiam magna
lacerantem sui pudeat."

"Accepisti," inquit, "in fabulis lacessentes caelum Gigantas; sed illos
quoque, uti condignum fuit, benigna fortitudo disposuit. Sed uisne rationes
ipsas inuicem collidamus? Forsitan ex huiusmodi conflictatione pulchra
quaedam ueritatis scintilla dissiliat." "Tuo," inquam, "arbitratu." "Deum,"
inquit, "esse omnium potentem nemo dubitauerit." "Qui quidem," inquam,
"mente consistat, nullus prorsus ambigat." "Qui uero est," inquit, "omnium
potens, nihil est quod ille non possit." "Nihil," inquam. "Num igitur deus
facere malum potest?" "Minime," inquam. "Malum igitur," inquit, "nihil est,
cum id facere ille non possit, qui nihil non potest." "Ludisne," inquam,
"me inextricabilem labyrinthum rationibus texens, quae nunc quidem qua
egrediaris introeas, nunc uero quo introieris egrediare, an mirabilem
quendam diuinae simplicitatis orbem complicas? Etenim paulo ante
beatitudine incipiens eam summum bonum esse dicebas quam in summo deo sitam
loquebare. Ipsum quoque deum summum esse bonum plenamque beatitudinem
disserebas; ex quo neminem beatum fore nisi qui pariter deus esset quasi
munusculum dabas. Rursus ipsam boni formam dei ac beatitudinis loquebaris
esse substantiam ipsumque unum id ipsum esse bonum docebas quod ab omni
rerum natura peteretur. Deum quoque bonitatis gubernaculis uniuersitatem
regere disputabas uolentiaque cuncta parere nec ullam mali esse naturam.
Atque haec nullis extrinsecus sumptis sed ex altero altero fidem trahente
insitis domesticisque probationibus explicabas."

Tum illa: "Minime," inquit, "ludimus remque omnium maximam dei munere quem
dudum deprecabamur exegimus. Ea est enim diuinae forma substantiae ut neque
in externa dilabatur nec in se externum aliquid ipsa suscipiat, sed, sicut
de ea Parmenides ait:

  [Greek: Pantothen eukuklou sphairaes enalinkion onkoi],

rerum orbem mobilem rotat, dum se immobilem ipsa conseruat. Quod si
rationes quoque non extra petitas sed intra rei quam tractabamus ambitum
collocatas agitauimus, nihil est quod admirere, cum Platone sanciente
didiceris cognatos de quibus loquuntur rebus oportere esse sermones.




  XII.

  Then I said that I did very well like of Plato's doctrine, for thou dost
  bring these things to my remembrance now the second time, first, because
  I lost their memory by the contagion of my body, and after when I was
  oppressed with the burden of grief. "If," quoth she, "thou reflectest
  upon that which heretofore hath been granted, thou wilt not be far from
  remembering that which in the beginning thou confessedst thyself to be
  ignorant of." "What?" quoth I. "By what government," quoth she, "the
  world is ruled." "I remember," quoth I, "that I did confess my
  ignorance, but though I foresee what thou wilt say, yet I desire to hear
  it more plainly from thyself." "Thou thoughtest a little before that it
  was not to be doubted that this world is governed by God." "Neither do I
  think now," quoth I, "neither will I ever think, that it is to be
  doubted of, and I will briefly explicate the reasons which move me to
  think so. This world could never have been compacted of so many divers
  and contrary parts, unless there were One that doth unite these so
  different things; and this disagreeing diversity of natures being united
  would separate and divide this concord, unless there were One that
  holdeth together that which He united. Neither would the course of
  nature continue so certain, nor would the different parts hold so well-
  ordered motions in due places, times, causality, spaces and qualities,
  unless there were One who, Himself remaining quiet, disposeth and
  ordereth this variety of motions. This, whatsoever it be, by which
  things created continue and are moved, I call God, a name which all men
  use."[ ]

  "Since," quoth she, "thou art of this mind, I think with little labour
  thou mayest be capable of felicity, and return to thy country in safety.
  But let us consider what we proposed. Have we not placed sufficiency in
  happiness, and granted that God is blessedness itself?" "Yes truly."
  "Wherefore," quoth she, "He will need no outward helps to govern the
  world, otherwise, if He needed anything, He had not full sufficiency."
  "That," quoth I, "must necessarily be so." "Wherefore He disposeth all
  things by Himself." "No doubt He doth," quoth I. "But it hath been
  proved that God is goodness itself." "I remember it very well," quoth I.
  "Then He disposeth all things by goodness: since He governeth all things
  by Himself, whom we have granted to be goodness. And this is as it were
  the helm and rudder by which the frame of the world is kept steadfast
  and uncorrupted." "I most willingly agree," quoth I, "and I foresaw a
  little before, though only with a slender guess, that thou wouldst
  conclude this." "I believe thee," quoth she, "for now I suppose thou
  lookest more watchfully about thee to discern the truth. But that which
  I shall say is no less manifest." "What?" quoth I. "Since that God is
  deservedly thought to govern all things with the helm of goodness, and
  all these things likewise, as I have showed, hasten to goodness with
  their natural contention, can there be any doubt made but that they are
  governed willingly, and that they frame themselves of their own accord
  to their disposer's beck, as agreeable and conformable to their ruler?"
  "It must needs be so," quoth I, "neither would it seem an happy
  government, if it were an imposed yoke, not a desired health." "There is
  nothing then which, following nature, endeavoureth to resist God."
  "Nothing," quoth I. "What if anything doth endeavour," quoth she, "can
  anything prevail against Him, whom we have granted to be most powerful
  by reason of His blessedness?" "No doubt," quoth I, "nothing could
  prevail." "Wherefore there is nothing which either will or can resist
  this sovereign goodness." "I think not," quoth I. "It is then the
  sovereign goodness which governeth all things strongly, and disposeth
  them sweetly." "How much," quoth I, "doth not only the reason which thou
  allegest, but much more the very words which thou usest, delight me,
  that folly which so much vexed me may at length be ashamed of herself."

  "Thou hast heard in the poets' fables," quoth she, "how the giants
  provoked heaven, but this benign fortitude put them also down, as they
  deserved. But wilt thou have our arguments contend together? Perhaps by
  this clash there will fly out some beautiful spark of truth." "As it
  pleaseth thee," quoth I. "No man can doubt," quoth she, "but that God is
  almighty." "No man," quoth I, "that is well in his wits." "But," quoth
  she, "there is nothing that He who is almighty cannot do." "Nothing,"
  quoth I. "Can God do evil?" "No," quoth I, "Wherefore," quoth she, "evil
  is nothing, since He cannot do it who can do anything." "Dost thou mock
  me," quoth I, "making with thy reasons an inextricable labyrinth,
  because thou dost now go in where thou meanest to go out again, and
  after go out, where thou camest in, or dost thou frame a wonderful
  circle of the simplicity of God? For a little before taking thy
  beginning from blessedness, thou affirmedst that to be the chiefest good
  which thou saidst was placed in God, and likewise thou provedst, that
  God Himself is the chiefest good and full happiness, out of which thou
  madest me a present of that inference, that no man shall be happy unless
  he be also a God. Again thou toldest me that the form of goodness is the
  substance of God and of blessedness, and that unity is the same with
  goodness, because it is desired by the nature of all things; thou didst
  also dispute that God governeth the whole world with the helm of
  goodness, and that all things obey willingly, and that there is no
  nature of evil, and thou didst explicate all these things with no
  foreign or far-fetched proofs, but with those which were proper and
  drawn from inward principles, the one confirming the other."

  "We neither play nor mock," quoth she, "and we have finished the
  greatest matter that can be by the assistance of God, whose aid we
  implored in the beginning. For such is the form of the Divine substance
  that it is neither divided into outward things, nor receiveth any such
  into itself, but as Parmenides saith of it:

    In body like a sphere well-rounded on all sides,[ ]

  it doth roll about the moving orb of things, while it keepeth itself
  unmovable. And if we have used no far-fetched reasons, but such as were
  placed within the compass of the matter we handled, thou hast no cause
  to marvel, since thou hast learned in Plato's school that our speeches
  must be like and as it were akin to the things we speak of.


  [ ] _Vide supra, Tr._ iv. (pp.   ff.).

  [ ] Cf. _Frag._  .   (Diels, _Vorsokratiker_, i. p.  ).




XII.

Felix qui potuit boni
Fontem uisere lucidum,
Felix qui potuit grauis
Terrae soluere uincula.
Quondam funera coniugis                                                    
Vates Threicius gemens
Postquam flebilibus modis
Siluas currere mobiles,
Amnes stare coegerat,
Iunxitque intrepidum latus                                                
Saeuis cerua leonibus,
Nec uisum timuit lepus
Iam cantu placidum canem,
Cum flagrantior intima
Feruor pectoris ureret,                                                   
Nec qui cuncta subegerant
Mulcerent dominum modi,
Inmites superos querens
Infernas adiit domos.
Illic blanda sonantibus                                                   
Chordis carmina temperans
Quidquid praecipuis deae
Matris fontibus hauserat,
Quod luctus dabat impotens,
Quod luctum geminans amor,                                                
Deflet Taenara commouens
Et dulci ueniam prece
Vmbrarum dominos rogat.
Stupet tergeminus nouo
Captus carmine ianitor,                                                   
Quae sontes agitant metu
Vltrices scelerum deae
Iam maestae lacrimis madent.
Non Ixionium caput
Velox praecipitat rota                                                    
Et longa site perditus
Spernit flumina Tantalus.
Vultur dum satur est modis,
Non traxit Tityi iecur.
Tandem, 'Vincimur,' arbiter                                               
Vmbrarum miserans ait,
'Donamus comitem uiro
Emptam carmine coniugem.
Sed lex dona coerceat,
Ne, dum Tartara liquerit,                                                 
Fas sit lumina flectere.'
Quis legem det amantibus?
Maior lex amor est sibi.
Heu, noctis prope terminos
Orpheus Eurydicen suam                                                    
Vidit, perdidit, occidit.
Vos haec fabula respicit
Quicumque in superum diem
Mentem ducere quaeritis.
Nam qui Tartareum in specus                                               
Victus lumina flexerit,
Quidquid praecipuum trahit
Perdit, dum uidet inferos."




  XII.

  Happy is he that can behold
  The well-spring whence all good doth rise,
  Happy is he that can unfold
  The bands with which the earth him ties.
  The Thracian poet whose sweet song
  Performed his wife's sad obsequies,
  And forced the woods to run along
  When he his mournful tunes did play,
  Whose powerful music was so strong
  That it could make the rivers stay;
  The fearful hinds not daunted were,
  But with the lions took their way,
  Nor did the hare behold with fear
  The dog whom these sweet notes appease.
  When force of grief drew yet more near,
  And on his heart did burning seize,
  Nor tunes which all in quiet bound
  Could any jot their master ease,
  The gods above too hard he found,
  And Pluto's palace visiting.
  He mixed sweet verses with the sound
  Of his loud harp's delightful string,
  All that he drank with thirsty draught
  From his high mother's chiefest spring,
  All that his restless grief him taught,
  And love which gives grief double aid,
  With this even hell itself was caught,
  Whither he went, and pardon prayed
  For his dear spouse (unheard request).
  The three-head porter was dismayed,
  Ravished with his unwonted guest,
  The Furies, which in tortures keep
  The guilty souls with pains opprest,
  Moved with his song began to weep.
  Ixion's wheel now standing still
  Turns not his head with motions steep.
  Though Tantalus might drink at will,
  To quench his thirst he would forbear.
  The vulture full with music shrill
  Doth not poor Tityus' liver tear.
  'We by his verses conquered are,'
  Saith the great King whom spirits fear.
  'Let us not then from him debar
  His wife whom he with songs doth gain.
  Yet lest our gift should stretch too far,
  We will it with this law restrain,
  That when from hell he takes his flight,
  He shall from looking back refrain.'
  Who can for lovers laws indite?
  Love hath no law but her own will.
  Orpheus, seeing on the verge of night
  Eurydice, doth lose and kill
  Her and himself with foolish love.
  But you this feigned tale fulfil,
  Who think unto the day above
  To bring with speed your darksome mind.
  For if, your eye conquered, you move
  Backward to Pluto left behind,
  All the rich prey which thence you took,
  You lose while back to hell you look."






ANICII MANLII SEVERINI BOETHII

V.C. ET INL. EXCONS. ORD. PATRICII


PHILOSOPHIAE CONSOLATIONIS

LIBER TERTIVS EXPLICIT

INCIPIT LIBER IV




I.

Haec cum Philosophia dignitate uultus et oris grauitate seruata leniter
suauiterque cecinisset, tum ego nondum penitus insiti maeroris oblitus
intentionem dicere adhuc aliquid parantis abrupi. Et: "O," inquam, "ueri
praeuia luminis quae usque adhuc tua fudit oratio, cum sui speculatione
diuina tum tuis rationibus inuicta patuerunt, eaque mihi etsi ob iniuriae
dolorem nuper oblita non tamen antehac prorsus ignorata dixisti. Sed ea
ipsa est uel maxima nostri causa maeroris, quod, cum rerum bonus rector
exsistat, uel esse omnino mala possint uel impunita praetereant; quod solum
quanta dignum sit admiratione profecto consideras. At huic aliud maius
adiungitur.  Nam imperante florenteque nequitia uirtus non solum praemiis
caret, uerum etiam sceleratorum pedibus subiecta calcatur et in locum
facinorum supplicia luit. Quae fieri in regno scientis omnia, potentis
omnia sed bona tantummodo uolentis dei nemo satis potest nec admirari nec
conqueri."

Tum illa: "Et esset," inquit, "infiniti stuporis omnibusque horribilius
monstris, si, uti tu aestimas, in tanti uelut patrisfamilias dispositissima
domo uilia uasa colerentur, pretiosa sordescerent. Sed non ita est. Nam si
ea quae paulo ante conclusa sunt inconuulsa seruantur, ipso de cuius nunc
regno loquimur auctore cognosces semper quidem potentes esse bonos, malos
uero abiectos semper atque inbecillos nec sine poena umquam esse uitia nec
sine praemio uirtutes, bonis felicia, malis semper infortunata contingere
multaque id genus quae sopitis querelis firma te soliditate corroborent. Et
quoniam uerae formam beatitudinis me dudum monstrante uidisti, quo etiam
sita sit agnouisti, decursis omnibus quae praemittere necessarium puto,
uiam tibi quae te domum reuehat ostendam. Pennas etiam tuae menti quibus se
in altum tollere possit adfigam, ut perturbatione depulsa sospes in patriam
meo ductu, mea semita, meis etiam uehiculis reuertaris.






  THE FOURTH BOOK OF BOETHIUS




  I.

  When Philosophy had sung these verses with a soft and sweet voice,
  observing due dignity and gravity in her countenance and gesture, I, not
  having altogether forgotten my inward grief, interrupted her speech
  which she was about to continue, and said: "O thou who bringest us to
  see true light, those things which hitherto thou hast treated of have
  manifestly appeared both to be divine when contemplated apart, and
  invincible when supported by thy reasons, and what thou hast uttered,
  though the force of grief had made me forget it of late, yet heretofore
  I was not altogether ignorant of it. But this is the chiefest cause of
  my sorrow, that since the governor of all things is so good, there can
  either be any evil at all, or that it pass unpunished. Which alone I
  beseech thee consider, how much admiration it deserveth. But there is
  another greater than this; for wickedness bearing rule and sway, virtue
  is not only without reward, but lieth also trodden under the wicked's
  feet, and is punished instead of vice. That which things should be done
  in the kingdom of God, who knoweth all things, can do all things, but
  will do only that which is good, no man can sufficiently admire nor
  complain."

  To which she answered: "It were indeed infinitely strange, and
  surpassing all monsters, if, as thou conceivest, in the best-ordered
  house of so great an householder the vilest vessels were made account of
  and the precious neglected; but it is not so. For if those things which
  were a little before concluded be kept unviolated, thou shalt by His
  help, of whose kingdom we speak, know that the good are always powerful,
  and the evil always abject and weak, and that vices are never without
  punishment, nor virtue without reward, and that the good are always
  prosperous, and the evil unfortunate, and many things of that sort,
  which will take away all cause of complaint, and give thee firm and
  solid strength. And since by my means thou hast already seen the form of
  true blessedness, and known where it is placed, running over all those
  things which I think necessary to rehearse, I will show thee the way
  which will carry thee home. And I will also fasten wings upon thy mind,
  with which she may rouse herself, that, all perturbation being driven
  away, thou mayest return safely into thy country by my direction, by my
  path, and with my wings.




I.

Sunt etenim pennae uolucres mihi
  Quae celsa conscendant poli.
Quas sibi cum uelox mens induit,
  Terras perosa despicit,
Aeris inmensi superat globum,                                              
  Nubesque postergum uidet,
Quique agili motu calet aetheris,
  Transcendit ignis uerticem,
Donec in astriferas surgat domos
  Phoeboque coniungat uias                                                
Aut comitetur iter gelidi senis
  Miles corusci sideris,
Vel quocumque micans nox pingitur,
  Recurrat astri circulum
Atque ubi iam exhausti fuerit satis,                                      
  Polum relinquat extimum
Dorsaque uelocis premat aetheris
  Compos uerendi luminis.
Hic regum sceptrum dominus tenet
  Orbisque habenas temperat                                               
Et uolucrem currum stabilis regit
  Rerum coruscus arbiter.
Huc te si reducem referat uia,
  Quam nunc requiris immemor:
'Haec,' dices, 'memini, patria est mihi,                                  
  Hinc ortus; hic sistam gradum."
Quod si terrarum placeat tibi
  Noctem relictam uisere,
Quos miseri toruos populi timent
  Cernes tyrannos exules."                                                




  I.

  For I have swift and nimble wings which will ascend the lofty skies,
  With which when thy quick mind is clad, it will the loathéd earth
      despise,
  And go beyond the airy globe, and watery clouds behind thee leave,
  Passing the fire which scorching heat doth from the heavens' swift
      course receive,
  Until it reach the starry house, and get to tread bright Phoebus' ways,
  Following the chilly sire's path,[ ] companion of his flashing rays,
  And trace the circle of the stars which in the night to us appear,
  And having stayed there long enough go on beyond the farthest sphere,
  Sitting upon the highest orb partaker of the glorious light,
  Where the great King his sceptre holds, and the world's reins doth guide
      aright,
  And, firm in his swift chariot, doth everything in order set.
  Unto this seat when thou art brought, thy country, which thou didst
      forget,
  Thou then wilt challenge to thyself, saying: 'This is the glorious land
  Where I was born, and in this soil my feet for evermore shall stand.
  Whence if thou pleasest to behold the earthly night which thou hast
      left,
  Those tyrants which the people fear will seem of their true home
      bereft.'"


  [ ] Cf. "frigida Saturni sese quo Stella receptet," Virg. _Georg._ i.
   .




II.

Tum ego: "Papae," inquam, "ut magna promittis! Nec dubito quin possis
efficere; tu modo quem excitaueris ne moreris." "Primum igitur," inquit,
"bonis semper adesse potentiam, malos cunctis uiribus esse desertos
agnoscas licebit, quorum quidem alterum demonstratur ex altero. Nam cum
bonum malumque contraria sint, si bonum potens esse constiterit, liquet
inbecillitas mali; at si fragilitas clarescat mali, boni firmitas nota est.
Sed uti nostrae sententiae fides abundantior sit, alterutro calle procedam
nunc hinc nunc inde proposita confirmans.

Duo sunt quibus omnis humanorum actuum constat effectus, uoluntas scilicet
ac potestas, quorum si alterutrum desit, nihil est quod explicari queat.
Deficiente etenim uoluntate ne aggreditur quidem quisque quod non uult; at
si potestas absit, uoluntas frustra sit. Quo fit ut si quem uideas adipisci
uelle quod minime adipiscatur, huic obtinendi quod uoluerit defuisse
ualentiam dubitare non possis." "Perspicuum est," inquam, "nec ullo modo
negari potest." "Quem uero effecisse quod uoluerit uideas, num etiam
potuisse dubitabis?" "Minime." "Quod uero quisque potest, in eo ualidus,
quod uero non potest, in hoc imbecillis esse censendus est." "Fateor,"
inquam. "Meministine igitur," inquit, "superioribus rationibus esse
collectum intentionem omnem uoluntatis humanae quae diuersis studiis agitur
ad beatitudinem festinare?" "Memini," inquam, "illud quoque esse
demonstratum." "Num recordaris beatitudinem ipsum esse bonum eoque modo,
cum beatitudo petitur, ab omnibus desiderari bonum?" "Minime," inquam,
"recordor, quoniam id memoriae fixum teneo." "Omnes igitur homines boni
pariter ac mali indiscreta intentione ad bonum peruenire nituntur?" "Ita,"
inquam, "consequens est." "Sed certum est adeptione boni bonos fieri."
"Certum." "Adipiscuntur igitur boni quod appetunt?" "Sic uidetur." "Mali
uero si adipiscerentur quod appetunt bonum, mali esse non possent." "Ita
est." "Cum igitur utrique bonum petant, sed hi quidem adipiscantur, illi
uero minime, num dubium est bonos quidem potentes esse, qui uero mali sunt
imbecillos?" "Quisquis," inquam, "dubitat, nec rerum naturam nec
consequentiam potest considerare rationum." "Rursus," inquit, "si duo sint
quibus idem secundum naturam propositum sit eorumque unus naturali officio
id ipsum agat atque perficiat, alter uero naturale illud officium minime
administrare queat, alio uero modo quam naturae conuenit non quidem impleat
propositum suum sed imitetur implentem, quemnam horum ualentiorem esse
decernis?" "Etsi coniecto," inquam, "quid uelis, planius tamen audire
desidero." "Ambulandi," inquit, "motum secundum naturam esse hominibus num
negabis?" "Minime," inquam. "Eiusque rei pedum officium esse naturale num
dubitas?" "Ne hoc quidem," inquam. "Si quis igitur pedibus incedere ualens
ambulet aliusque cui hoc naturale pedum desit officium, manibus nitens
ambulare conetur, quis horum iure ualentior existimari potest?" "Contexe,"
inquam, "cetera; nam quin naturalis officii potens eo qui idem nequeat
ualentior sit, nullus ambigat." "Sed summum bonum, quod aeque malis
bonisque propositum, boni quidem naturali officio uirtutum petunt, mali
uero uariam per cupiditatem, quod adipiscendi boni naturale officium non
est, idem ipsum conantur adipisci. An tu aliter existimas?"  "Minime,"
inquam, "nam etiam quod est consequens patet. Ex his enim quae concesserim,
bonos quidem potentes, malos uero esse necesse est imbecillos."

"Recte," inquit, "praecurris idque, uti medici sperare solent, indicium est
erectae iam resistentisque naturae. Sed quoniam te ad intellegendum
promptissimum esse conspicio, crebras coaceruabo rationes. Vide enim quanta
uitiosorum hominum pateat infirmitas qui ne ad hoc quidem peruenire queunt
ad quod eos naturalis ducit ac paene compellit intentio. Et quid si hoc tam
magno ac paene inuicto praeeuntis naturae desererentur auxilio? Considera
uero quanta sceleratos homines habeat impotentia. Neque enim leuia aut
ludicra praemia petunt, quae consequi atque obtinere non possunt, sed circa
ipsam rerum summam uerticemque deficiunt nec in eo miseris contingit
effectus quod solum dies noctesque moliuntur; in qua re bonorum uires
eminent. Sicut enim eum qui pedibus incedens ad eum locum usque peruenire
potuisset, quo nihil ulterius peruium iaceret incessui, ambulandi
potentissimum esse censeres, ita eum qui expetendorum finem quo nihil ultra
est apprehendit, potentissimum necesse est iudices. Ex quo fit quod huic
obiacet, ut idem scelesti, idem uiribus omnibus uideantur esse deserti. Cur
enim relicta uirtute uitia sectantur? Inscitiane bonorum? Sed quid
eneruatius ignorantiae caecitate? An sectanda nouerunt? Sed transuersos eos
libido praecipitat. Sic quoque intemperantia fragiles qui obluctari uitio
nequeunt. An scientes uolentesque bonum deserunt, ad uitia deflectunt? Sed
hoc modo non solum potentes esse sed omnino esse desinunt. Nam qui communem
omnium quae sunt finem relinquunt, pariter quoque esse desistunt. Quod
quidem cuipiam mirum forte uideatur, ut malos, qui plures hominum sunt,
eosdem non esse dicamus; sed ita sese res habet. Nam qui mali sunt eos
malos esse non abnuo; sed eosdem esse pure atque simpliciter nego.

Nam uti cadauer hominem mortuum dixeris, simpliciter uero hominem appellare
non possis, ita uitiosos malos quidem esse concesserim, sed esse absolute
nequeam confiteri. Est enim quod ordinem retinet seruatque naturam; quod
uero ab hac deficit, esse etiam quod in sua natura situm est derelinquit.
'Sed possunt,' inquies, 'mali.' Ne ego quidem negauerim, sed haec eorum
potentia non a uiribus sed ab imbecillitate descendit. Possunt enim mala
quae minime ualerent, si in bonorum efficientia manere potuissent. Quae
possibilitas eos euidentius nihil posse demonstrat. Nam si, uti paulo ante
collegimus, malum nihil est, cum mala tantummodo possint, nihil posse
improbos liquet." "Perspicuum est." "Atque ut intellegas quaenam sit huius
potentiae uis, summo bono nihil potentius esse paulo ante definiuimus."
"Ita est," inquam. "Sed idem," inquit, "facere malum nequit." "Minime."
"Est igitur," inquit, "aliquis qui omnia posse homines putet?" "Nisi quis
insaniat, nemo." "Atqui idem possunt mala." "Vtinam quidem," inquam, "non
possent." "Cum igitur bonorum tantummodo potens possit omnia, non uero
queant omnia potentes etiam malorum, eosdem qui mala possunt minus posse
manifestum est. Huc accedit quod omnem potentiam inter expetenda numerandam
omniaque expetenda referri ad bonum uelut ad quoddam naturae suae cacumen
ostendimus. Sed patrandi sceleris possibilitas referri ad bonum non potest;
expetenda igitur non est. Atqui omnis potentia expetenda est; liquet igitur
malorum possibilitatem non esse potentiam. Ex quibus omnibus bonorum quidem
potentia, malorum uero minime dubitabilis apparet infirmitas ueramque illam
Platonis esse sententiam liquet solos quod desiderent facere posse
sapientes, improbos uero exercere quidem quod libeat, quod uero desiderent
explere non posse. Faciunt enim quaelibet, dum per ea quibus delectantur id
bonum quod desiderant se adepturos putant; sed minime adipiscuntur, quoniam
ad beatitudinem probra non ueniunt.




  II.[ ]

  "Oh!" quoth I. "How great things dost thou promise! And I doubt not but
  thou canst perform them, wherefore stay me not now that thou hast
  stirred up my desires." "First then," quoth she, "that good men are
  always powerful, and evil men of no strength, thou mayest easily know,
  the one is proved by the other. For since that good and evil are
  contraries, if it be convinced that goodness is potent, the weakness of
  evil will be also manifest; and contrariwise if we discern the frailty
  of evil, we must needs acknowledge the firmness of goodness. But that
  our opinions may be more certainly embraced, I will take both ways,
  confirming my propositions, sometime from one part, sometime from
  another.

  There be two things by which all human actions are effected, will and
  power, of which if either be wanting, there can nothing be performed.
  For if there want will, no man taketh anything in hand against his will,
  and if there be not power, the will is in vain. So that, if thou seest
  any willing to obtain that which he doth not obtain, thou canst not
  doubt but that he wanted power to obtain what he would." "It is
  manifest," quoth I, "and can by no means be denied." "And wilt thou
  doubt that he could, whom thou seest bring to pass what he desired?"
  "No." "But every man is mighty in that which he can do, and weak in that
  which he cannot do." "I confess it," quoth I. "Dost thou remember then,"
  quoth she, "that it was inferred by our former discourses that all the
  intentions of man's will doth hasten to happiness, though their courses
  be divers?" "I remember," quoth I, "that that also was proved." "Dost
  thou also call to mind that blessedness is goodness itself, and
  consequently when blessedness is sought after, goodness must of course
  be desired?" "I call it not to mind, for I have it already fixed in my
  memory." "Wherefore all men both good and bad without difference of
  intentions endeavour to obtain goodness." "It followeth," quoth I. "But
  it is certain that men are made good by the obtaining of goodness." "It
  is so." "Wherefore good men obtain what they desire." "So it seemeth."
  "And if evil men did obtain the goodness they desire, they could not be
  evil." "It is true." "Wherefore since they both desire goodness, but the
  one obtaineth it and the other not, there is no doubt but that good men
  are powerful, and the evil weak." "Whosoever doubteth of this," quoth I,
  "he neither considereth the nature of things, nor the consequence of thy
  reasons." "Again," quoth she, "if there be two to whom the same thing is
  proposed according to nature, and the one of them bringeth it perfectly
  to pass with his natural function, but the other cannot exercise that
  natural function but after another manner than is agreeable to nature,
  and doth not perform that which he had proposed, but imitateth the other
  who performeth it: which of these two wilt thou judge to be more
  powerful?" "Though I conjecture," quoth I, "at thy meaning, yet I desire
  to hear it more plainly." "Wilt thou deny," quoth she, "that the motion
  of walking is agreeable to the nature of men?" "No," quoth I. "And
  makest thou any doubt that the function of it doth naturally belong to
  the feet?" "There is no doubt of this neither," quoth I. "Wherefore if
  one that can go upon his feet doth walk, and another who hath not this
  natural function of his feet endeavoureth to walk by creeping upon his
  hands, which of these two is deservedly to be esteemed the stronger?"
  "Infer the rest," quoth I, "for no man doubteth but that he which can
  use that natural function is stronger than he which cannot." "But,"
  quoth she, "the good seek to obtain the chiefest good, which is equally
  proposed to bad and good, by the natural function of virtues, but the
  evil endeavour to obtain the same by divers concupiscences, which are
  not the natural function of obtaining goodness. Thinkest thou
  otherwise?" "No," quoth I, "for it is manifest what followeth. For by
  the force of that which I have already granted, it is necessary that
  good men are powerful and evil men weak."

  "Thou runnest before rightly," quoth she, "and it is (as physicians are
  wont to hope) a token of an erected and resisting nature. Wherefore,
  since I see thee most apt and willing to comprehend, I will therefore
  heap up many reasons together. For consider the great weakness of
  vicious men, who cannot come so far as their natural intention leadeth
  and almost compelleth them. And what if they were destitute of this so
  great and almost invincible help of the direction of nature? Ponder
  likewise the immense impotency of wicked men. For they are no light or
  trifling rewards[ ] which they desire, and cannot obtain: but they
  fail in the very sum and top of things: neither can the poor wretches
  compass that which they only labour for nights and days: in which thing
  the forces of the good eminently appear. For as thou wouldst judge him
  to be most able to walk who going on foot could come as far as there
  were any place to go in: so must thou of force judge him most powerful
  who obtaineth the end of all that can be desired, beyond which there is
  nothing. Hence that which is opposite also followeth, that the same men
  are wicked and destitute of all forces. For why do they follow vices,
  forsaking virtues? By ignorance of that which is good? But what is more
  devoid of strength than blind ignorance? Or do they know what they
  should embrace, but passion driveth them headlong the contrary way? So
  also intemperance makes them frail, since they cannot strive against
  vice. Or do they wittingly and willingly forsake goodness, and decline
  to vices? But in this sort they leave not only to be powerful, but even
  to be at all. For they which leave the common end of all things which
  are, leave also being. Which may perhaps seem strange to some, that we
  should say that evil men are not at all, who are the greatest part of
  men: but yet it is so. For I deny not that evil men are evil, but withal
  I say that purely and simply they are not.

  For as thou mayest call a carcase a dead man, but not simply a man, so I
  confess that the vicious are evil, but I cannot grant that they are
  absolutely. For that is which retaineth order, and keepeth nature, but
  that which faileth from this leaveth also to be that which is in his own
  nature. But thou wilt say that evil men can do many things, neither will
  I deny it, but this their power proceedeth not from forces but from
  weakness. For they can do evil, which they could not do if they could
  have remained in the performance of that which is good. Which
  possibility declareth more evidently that they can do nothing. For if,
  as we concluded a little before, evil is nothing, since they can only do
  evil, it is manifest that the wicked can do nothing." "It is most
  manifest." "And that thou mayest understand what the force of this power
  is; we determined a little before that there is nothing more powerful
  than the Sovereign Goodness." "It is true," quoth I. "But He cannot do
  evil." "No." "Is there any then," quoth she, "that think that men can do
  all things?" "No man, except he be mad, thinketh so." "But yet men can
  do evil." "I would to God they could not," quoth I. "Since therefore he
  that can only do good, can do all things, and they who can do evil,
  cannot do all things, it is manifest that they which can do evil are
  less potent. Moreover, we have proved that all power is to be accounted
  among those things which are to be wished for, and that all such things
  have reference to goodness, as to the very height of their nature. But
  the possibility of committing wickedness cannot have reference to
  goodness. Wherefore it is not to be wished for. Yet all power is to be
  wished for; and consequently it is manifest, possibility of evil is no
  power. By all which the power of the good and the undoubted infirmity of
  evil appeareth. And it is manifest that the sentence of Plato is true:
  that only wise men can do that which they desire, and that the wicked
  men practise indeed what they list, but cannot perform what they would.
  For they do what they list, thinking to obtain the good which they
  desire by those things which cause them delight; but they obtain it not,
  because shameful action cannot arrive to happiness.[ ]


II.

Quos uides sedere celsos solii culmine reges
Purpura claros nitente saeptos tristibus armis
Ore toruo comminantes rabie cordis anhelos,
Detrahat si quis superbis uani tegmina cultus,
Iam uidebit intus artas dominos ferre catenas.                             
Hinc enim libido uersat auidis corda uenenis,
Hinc flagellat ira mentem fluctus turbida tollens
Maeror aut captos fatigat aut spes lubrica torquet
Ergo cum caput tot unum cernas ferre tyrannos,
Non facit quod optat ipse dominis pressus iniquis.                        




  II.

  The kings whom we behold
  In highest glory placed,
  And with rich purple graced,
  Compassed with soldiers bold;
  Whose countenance shows fierce threats,
  Who with rash fury chide,
  If any strip the pride
  From their vainglorious feats;
  He'll see them close oppressed
  Within by galling chains
  For filthy lust there reigns
  And poisoneth their breast,
  Wrath often them perplexeth
  Raising their minds like waves,
  Sorrow their power enslaves
  And sliding hope them vexeth.
  So many tyrants still
  Dwelling in one poor heart,
  Except they first depart
  She cannot have her will.




III.

Videsne igitur quanto in caeno probra uoluantur, qua probitas luce
resplendeat? In quo perspicuum est numquam bonis praemia numquam sua
sceleribus deesse supplicia. Rerum etenim quae geruntur illud propter quod
unaquaeque res geritur, eiusdem rei praemium esse non iniuria uideri
potest, uti currendi in stadio propter quam curritur iacet praemium corona.
Sed beatitudinem esse idem ipsum bonum propter quod omnia geruntur
ostendimus. Est igitur humanis actibus ipsum bonum ueluti praemium commune
propositum. Atqui hoc a bonis non potest separari neque enim bonus ultra
iure uocabitur qui careat bono; quare probos mores sua praemia non
relinquunt. Quantumlibet igitur saeuiant mali, sapienti tamen corona non
decidet, non arescet. Neque enim probis animis proprium decus aliena
decerpit improbitas. Quod si extrinsecus accepto laetaretur, poterat hoc
uel alius quispiam uel ipse etiam qui contulisset auferre; sed quoniam id
sua cuique probitas confert, tum suo praemio carebit, cum probus esse
desierit. Postremo cum omne praemium idcirco appetatur quoniam bonum esse
creditur, quis boni compotem praemii iudicet expertem? At cuius praemii?
Omnium pulcherrimi maximique. Memento etenim corollarii illius quod paulo
ante praecipuum dedi ac sic collige: cum ipsum bonum beatitudo sit, bonos
omnes eo ipso quod boni sint fieri beatos liquet. Sed qui beati sint deos
esse conuenit. Est igitur praemium bonorum quod nullus. deterat dies,
nullius minuat potestas, nullius fuscet improbitas, deos fieri. Quae cum
ita sint, de malorum quoque inseparabili poena dubitare sapiens nequeat.
Nam cum bonum malumque item poenae atque praemium aduersa fronte
dissideant, quae in boni praemio uidemus accedere eadem necesse est in mali
poena contraria parte respondeant. Sicut igitur probis probitas ipsa fit
praemium, ita improbis nequitia ipsa supplicium est. Iam uero quisquis
afficitur poena, malo se affectum esse non dubitat. Si igitur sese ipsi
aestimare uelint, possuntne sibi supplicii expertes uideri quos omnium
malorum extrema nequitia non affecit modo uerum etiam uehementer infecit?
Vide autem ex aduersa parte bonorum, quae improbos poena comitetur. Omne
namque quod sit unum esse ipsumque unum bonum esse paulo ante didicisti,
cui consequens est ut omne quod sit id etiam bonum esse uideatur. Hoc
igitur modo quidquid a bono deficit esse desistit; quo fit ut mali desinant
esse quod fuerant, sed fuisse homines adhuc ipsa humani corporis reliqua
species ostentat. Quare uersi in malitiam humanam quoque amisere naturam.
Sed cum ultra homines quemque prouehere sola probitas possit, necesse est
ut quos ab humana condicione deiecit, infra hominis meritum detrudat
improbitas. Euenit igitur, ut quem transformatum uitiis uideas hominem
aestimare non possis. Auaritia feruet alienarum opum uiolentus ereptor?
Lupi similem dixeris. Ferox atque inquies linguam litigiis exercet? Cani
comparabis. Insidiator occultus subripuisse fraudibus gaudet? Vulpeculis
exaequetur. Irae intemperans fremit? Leonis animum gestare credatur.
Pauidus ac fugax non metuenda formidat? Ceruis similis habeatur. Segnis ac
stupidus torpit? Asinum uiuit. Leuis atque inconstans studia permutat?
Nihil auibus differt. Foedis inmundisque libidinibus immergitur? Sordidae
suis uoluptate detinetur. Ita fit ut qui probitate deserta homo esse
desierit, cum in diuinam condicionem transire non possit, uertatur in
beluam.




  III.

  Seest thou then in what mire wickedness wallows, and how clearly honesty
  shineth? By which it is manifest that the good are never without
  rewards, nor the evil without punishments. For in all things that are
  done that for which anything is done may deservedly seem the reward of
  that action, as to him that runneth a race, the crown for which he
  runneth is proposed as a reward. But we have showed that blessedness is
  the selfsame goodness for which all things are done. Wherefore this
  goodness is proposed as a common reward for all human actions, and this
  cannot be separated from those who are good. For he shall not rightly be
  any longer called good, who wanteth goodness; wherefore virtuous manners
  are not left without their due rewards. And how much so ever the evil do
  rage, yet the wise man's crown will not fade nor wither.  For others'
  wickedness depriveth not virtuous minds of their proper glory. But if he
  should rejoice at anything which he hath from others, either he who gave
  it, or any other might take it away. But because every man's virtue is
  the cause of it, then only he shall want his reward when he leaveth to
  be virtuous. Lastly, since every reward is therefore desired because it
  is thought to be good, who can judge him to be devoid of reward, which
  hath goodness for his possession?  But what reward hath he? The most
  beautiful and the greatest that can be. For remember that
  _corollarium_ [ ] which I presented thee with a little before, as
  with a rare and precious jewel, and infer thus: Since that goodness
  itself is happiness, it is manifest that all good men even by being good
  are made happy.  But we agreed that happy men are gods. Wherefore the
  reward of good men, which no time can waste, no man's power diminish, no
  man's wickedness obscure, is to become gods. Which things being so, no
  wise man can any way doubt of the inseparable punishment of the evil.
  For since goodness and evil, punishment and reward, are opposite the one
  to the other, those things which we see fall out in the reward of
  goodness must needs be answerable in a contrary manner in the punishment
  of evil. Wherefore as to honest men honesty itself is a reward, so to
  the wicked their very wickedness is a punishment. And he that is
  punished doubteth not but that he is afflicted with the evil. Wherefore
  if they would truly consider their own estate, can they think themselves
  free from punishment, whom wickedness, the worst of all evils, doth not
  only touch but strongly infect? But weigh the punishment which
  accompanieth the wicked, by comparing it to the reward of the virtuous.
  For thou learnedst not long before that whatsoever is at all is one, and
  that unity is goodness, by which it followeth that whatsoever is must
  also be good. And in this manner, whatsoever falleth from goodness
  ceaseth to be, by which it followeth that evil men leave to be that
  which they were, but the shape of men, which they still retain, showeth
  them to have been men: wherefore by embracing wickedness they have lost
  the nature of men. But since virtue alone can exalt us above men,
  wickedness must needs cast those under the desert of men, which it hath
  bereaved of that condition. Wherefore thou canst not account him a man
  whom thou seest transformed by vices. Is the violent extorter of other
  men's goods carried away with his covetous desire? Thou mayest liken him
  to a wolf. Is the angry and unquiet man always contending and brawling?
  Thou mayest compare him to a dog. Doth the treacherous fellow rejoice
  that he hath deceived others with his hidden frauds? Let him be
  accounted no better than a fox. Doth the outrageous fret and fume? Let
  him be thought to have a lion's mind. Is the fearful and timorous afraid
  without cause? Let him be esteemed like to hares and deer. Is the slow
  and stupid always idle? He liveth an ass's life. Doth the light and
  unconstant change his courses? He is nothing different from the birds.
  Is he drowned in filthy and unclean lusts? He is entangled in the
  pleasure of a stinking sow. So that he who, leaving virtue, ceaseth to
  be a man, since he cannot be partaker of the divine condition, is turned
  into a beast.


  [ ] _Vide supra, p.  ._




III.

Vela Neritii ducis
Et uagas pelago rates
Eurus appulit insulae,
Pulchra qua residens dea
Solis edita semine                                                         
Miscet hospitibus nouis
Tacta carmine pocula.
Quos ut in uarios modos
Vertit herbipotens manus,
Hunc apri facies tegit,                                                   
Ille Marmaricus leo
Dente crescit et unguibus.
Hic lupis nuper additus,
Flere dum parat, ululat.
Ille tigris ut Indica                                                     
Tecta mitis obambulat.
Sed licet uariis malis
Numen Arcadis alitis
Obsitum miserans ducem
Peste soluerit hospitis,                                                  
Iam tamen mala remiges
Ore pocula traxerant,
Iam sues Cerealia
Glande pabula uerterant
Et nihil manet integrum                                                   
Voce corpore perditis.
Sola mens stabilis super
Monstra quae patitur gemit.
O leuem nimium manum
Nec potentia gramina,                                                     
Membra quae ualeant licet,
Corda uertere non ualent!
Intus est hominum uigor
Arce conditus abdita.
Haec uenena potentius                                                     
Detrahunt hominem sibi
Dira quae penitus meant
Nec nocentia corpori
Mentis uulnere saeuiunt."




  III.

  The sails which wise Ulysses bore,
  And ships which in the seas long time did stray
  The eastern wind drave to that shore
  Where the fair Goddess Lady Circe lay,
  Daughter by birth to Phoebus bright,
  Who with enchanted cups and charms did stay
  Her guests, deceived with their delight
  And into sundry figures them did change,
  Being most skilful in the might
  And secret force of herbs and simples strange;
  Some like to savage boars, and some
  Like lions fierce, which daily use to range
  Through Libya,[ ] in tooth and claw become.
  Others are changed to the shape and guise
  Of ravenous wolves, and waxing dumb
  Use howling in the stead of manly cries.
  Others like to the tiger rove[ ]
  Which in the scorched Indian desert lies.
  And though the winged son of Jove[ ]
  From these bewitchéd cups' delightful taste
  To keep the famous captain strove,
  Yet them the greedy mariners embraced
  With much desire, till turned to swine
  Instead of bread they fed on oaken mast.
  Ruined in voice and form, no sign
  Remains to them of any human grace;
  Only their minds unchanged repine
  To see their bodies in such ugly case.
  O feeble hand and idle art
  Which, though it could the outward limbs deface,
  Yet had no force to change the heart.
  For all the force of men given by God's arm
  Lies hidden in their inmost part.
  The poisons therefore which within them swarm
  More deeply pierce, and with more might,
  For to the body though they do no harm,
  Yet on the soul they work their spite."


  [ ] Literally "Marmaric," i.e. properly, the region between Egypt and
  the great Syrtis; generally, African, cf. Lucan iii.  .

  [ ] Literally, "rove tame round the house."

  [ ] i.e. Mercury who was born in Arcadia; cf. Virg. _Aen._ viii.
   - .




IV.

Tum ego: "Fateor," inquam, "nec iniuria dici uideo uitiosos, tametsi humani
corporis speciem seruent, in beluas tamen animorum qualitate mutari; sed
quorum atrox scelerataque mens bonorum pernicie saeuit, id ipsum eis licere
noluissem." "Nec licet," inquit, "uti conuenienti monstrabitur loco. Sed
tamen si id ipsum quod eis licere creditur auferatur, magna ex parte
sceleratorum hominum poena releuetur. Etenim quod incredibile cuiquam forte
uideatur, infeliciores esse necesse est malos, cum cupita perfecerint, quam
si ea quae cupiunt implere non possint. Nam si miserum est uoluisse praua,
potuisse miserius est, sine quo uoluntatis miserae langueret effectus.
Itaque cum sua singulis miseria sit, triplici infortunio necesse est
urgeantur quos uideas scelus uelle, posse, perficere." "Accedo," inquam,
"sed uti hoc infortunio cito careant patrandi sceleris possibilitate
deserti uehementer exopto." "Carebunt," inquit, "ocius quam uel tu forsitan
uelis uel illi sese aestiment esse carituros. Neque enim est aliquid in tam
breuibus uitae metis ita serum quod exspectare longum immortalis praesertim
animus putet: quorum magna spes et excelsa facinorum machina repentino
atque insperato saepe fine destruitur, quod quidem illis miseriae modum
statuit.

Nam si nequitia miseros facit, miserior sit necesse est diuturnior nequam;
quos infelicissimos esse iudicarem, si non eorum malitiam saltem mors
extrema finiret. Etenim si de prauitatis infortunio uera conclusimus,
infinitam liquet esse miseriam quam esse constat aeternam." Tum ego: "Mira
quidem," inquam, "et concessu difficilis inlatio, sed his eam quae prius
concessa sunt nimium conuenire cognosco." "Recte," inquit, "aestimas. Sed
qui conclusioni accedere durum putat, aequum est uel falsum aliquid
praecessisse demonstret uel collocationem propositionum non esse efficacem
necessariae conclusionis ostendat; alioquin concessis praecedentibus nihil
prorsus est quod de inlatione causetur. Nam hoc quoque quod dicam non minus
mirum uideatur, sed ex his quae sumpta sunt aeque est necessarium."
"Quidnam?" inquam. "Feliciores," inquit, "esse improbos supplicia luentes
quam si eos nulla iustitiae poena coerceat. Neque id nunc molior quod
cuiuis ueniat in mentem, corrigi ultione prauos mores et ad rectum
supplicii terrore deduci, ceteris quoque exemplum esse culpanda fugiendi,
sed alio quodam modo infeliciores esse improbos arbitror impunitos, tametsi
nulla ratio correctionis, nullus respectus habeatur exempli." "Et quis
erit," inquam, "praeter hos alius modus?" Et illa: "Bonos," inquit, "esse
felices, malos uero miseros nonne concessimus?" "Ita est," inquam. "Si
igitur," inquit, "miseriae cuiuspiam bonum aliquid addatur, nonne felicior
est eo cuius pura ac solitaria sine cuiusquam boni admixtione miseria est?"
"Sic," inquam, "uidetur." "Quid si eidem misero qui cunctis careat bonis,
praeter ea quibus miser est malum aliud fuerit adnexum, nonne multo
infelicior eo censendus est cuius infortunium boni participatione
releuatur?" "Quidni?" inquam. "Sed puniri improbos iustum, impunitos uero
elabi iniquum esse manifestum est." "Quis id neget?" "Sed ne illud quidem,"
ait, "quisquam negabit bonum esse omne quod iustum est contraque quod
iniustum est malum." Liquere, respondi.[ ] "Habent igitur improbi, cum
puniuntur, quidem boni aliquid adnexum poenam ipsam scilicet quae ratione
iustitiae bona est, idemque cum supplicio carent, inest eis aliquid
ulterius mali ipsa impunitas quam iniquitatis merito malum esse confessus
es." "Negare non possum." "Multo igitur infeliciores improbi sunt iniusta
impunitate donati quam iusta ultione puniti." Tum ego: "Ista quidem
consequentia sunt eis quae paulo ante conclusa sunt.

Sed quaeso," inquam, "te, nullane animarum supplicia post defunctum morte
corpus relinquis?" "Et magna quidem," inquit, "quorum alia poenali
acerbitate, alia uero purgatoria clementia exerceri puto. Sed nunc de his
disserere consilium non est. Id uero hactenus egimus, ut quae indignissima
tibi uidebatur malorum potestas eam nullam esse cognosceres quosque
impunitos querebare, uideres numquam improbitatis suae carere suppliciis,
licentiam quam cito finiri precabaris nec longam esse disceres
infelicioremque fore, si diuturnior, infelicissimam uero, si esset aeterna;
post haec miseriores esse improbos iniusta impunitate dimissos quam iusta
ultione punitos. Cui sententiae consequens est ut tum demum grauioribus
suppliciis urgeantur, cum impuniti esse creduntur."

Tum ego: "Cum tuas," inquam, "rationes considero, nihil dici uerius puto.
At si ad hominum iudicia reuertar, quis ille est cui haec non credenda modo
sed saltem audienda uideantur?" "Ita est," inquit illa. "Nequeunt enim
oculos tenebris assuetos ad lucem perspicuae ueritatis attollere,
similesque auibus sunt quarum intuitum nox inluminat dies caecat. Dum enim
non rerum ordinem, sed suos intuentur affectus, uel licentiam uel
impunitatem scelerum putant esse felicem. Vide autem quid aeterna lex
sanciat. Melioribus animum conformaueris, nihil opus est iudice praemium
deferente tu te ipse excellentioribus addidisti. Studium ad peiora
deflexeris, extra ne quaesieris ultorem. Tu te ipse in deteriora trusisti,
ueluti si uicibus sordidam humum caelumque respicias, cunctis extra
cessantibus ipsa cernendi ratione nunc caeno nunc sideribus interesse
uidearis. At uulgus ista non respicit. Quid igitur? Hisne accedamus quos
beluis similes esse monstrauimus? Quid si quis amisso penitus uisu ipsum
etiam se habuisse obliuisceretur intuitum nihilque sibi ad humanam
perfectionem deesse arbitraretur, num uidentes eadem caecos putaremus? Nam
ne illud quidem adquiescent quod aeque ualidis rationum nititur
firmamentis: infeliciores eos esse qui faciant quam qui patiantur
iniuriam." "Vellem," inquam, "has ipsas audire rationes." "Omnem," inquit,
"improbum num supplicio dignum negas?" "Minime." "Infelices uero esse qui
sint improbi multipliciter liquet." "Ita," inquam. "Qui igitur supplicio
digni sunt miseros esse non dubitas?" "Conuenit," inquam. "Si igitur
cognitor," ait, "resideres, cui supplicium inferendum putares, eine qui
fecisset an qui pertulisset iniuriam?" "Nec ambigo," inquam, "quin perpesso
satisfacerem dolore facientis." "Miserior igitur tibi iniuriae inlator quam
acceptor esse uideretur." "Consequitur," inquam. "Hinc igitur aliis de
causis ea radice nitentibus, quod turpitudo suapte natura miseros faciat,
apparet inlatam cuilibet iniuriam non accipientis sed inferentis esse
miseriam." "Atqui nunc," ait, "contra faciunt oratores. Pro his enim qui
graue quid acerbumque perpessi sunt miserationem iudicum excitare conantur,
cum magis admittentibus iustior miseratio debeatur; quos non ab iratis sed
a propitiis potius miserantibusque accusatoribus ad iudicium ueluti aegros
ad medicum duci oportebat, ut culpae morbos supplicio resecarent. Quo pacto
defensorum opera uel tota frigeret, uel si prodesse hominibus mallet, in
accusationis habitum uerteretur, Ipsi quoque improbi, si eis aliqua rimula
uirtutem relictam fas esset aspicere uitiorumque sordes poenarum
cruciatibus se deposituros uiderent compensatione adipiscendae probitatis,
nec hos cruciatus esse ducerent defensorumque operam repudiarent ac se
totos accusatoribus iudicibusque permitterent. Quo fit ut apud sapientes
nullus prorsus odio locus relinquatur. Nam bonos quis nisi stultissimus
oderit? Malos uero odisse ratione caret. Nam si, uti corporum languor, ita
uitiositas quidam est quasi morbus animorum, cum aegros corpore minime
dignos odio sed potius miseratione iudicemus, multo magis non insequendi
sed miserandi sunt quorum mentes omni languore atrocior urget improbitas.


[ ] Sed puniri ... respondi _quae infra_ (_in pag.   l.  _) _post_
ultioni puniti _in codicibus habentur huc transponenda esse censuit P.
Langenus, demonstrauit A. Engelbrecht._




  IV.

  Then said I, "I confess and perceive that thou affirmest not without
  cause that the vicious, though they keep the outward shape of men, are
  in their inward state of mind changed into brute beasts. But I would
  have had them whose cruel and wicked heart rageth to the harm of the
  good, restrained from executing their malice." "They are restrained,"
  quoth she, "as shall be proved in convenient place. But yet if this
  liberty which they seem to have be taken away, their punishment also is
  in great part released. For (which perhaps to some may seem incredible)
  evil men must necessarily be more unhappy when they have brought to pass
  their purposes than if they could not obtain what they desire. For if it
  be a miserable thing to desire that which is evil, it is more miserable
  to be able to perform it, without which the miserable will could not
  have any effect. Wherefore since everyone of these hath their peculiar
  misery, they must of force be oppressed with a threefold wretchedness,
  whom thou seest desire, be able, and perform wickedness." "I grant it,"
  quoth I, "but earnestly wish that they may soon be delivered from this
  misery, having lost the power to perform their malice." "They will lose
  it," quoth she, "sooner than perhaps either thou wouldst, or they
  themselves suppose. For in the short compass of this life there is
  nothing so late that any one, least of all an immortal soul, should
  think it long in coming; so that the great hope and highest attempts of
  the wicked are many times made frustrate with a sudden and unexpected
  end, which in truth setteth some end to their misery.

  For if wickedness make men miserable, the longer one is wicked, the more
  miserable he must needs be; and I should judge them the most unhappy men
  that may be, if death at least did not end their malice. For if we have
  concluded truly of the misery of wickedness, it is manifest that the
  wretchedness which is everlasting must of force be infinite." "A strange
  illation," quoth I, "and hard to be granted; but I see that those things
  which were granted before agree very well with these." "Thou thinkest
  aright," quoth she, "but he that findeth difficulty to yield to the
  conclusion must either show that something which is presupposed is
  false, or that the combination of the propositions makes not a necessary
  conclusion; otherwise, granting that which went before, he hath no
  reason to doubt of the inference. For this also which I will conclude
  now will seem no less strange, and yet followeth as necessarily out of
  those things which are already assumed." "What?" quoth I. "That wicked
  men," quoth she, "are more happy being punished than if they escaped the
  hands of justice. Neither do I now go about to show that which may come
  into every man's mind, that evil customs are corrected by chastisement,
  and are reduced to virtue by the terror of punishment, and that others
  may take example to avoid evil, but in another manner also I think
  vicious men that go unpunished to be more miserable, although we take no
  account of correction and pay no regard to example." "And what other
  manner shall this be," quoth I, "besides these?" "Have we not granted,"
  quoth she, "that the good are happy, and the evil miserable?" "We have,"
  quoth I. "If then," quoth she, "something that is good be added to one's
  misery, is he not happier than another whose misery is desolate and
  solitary, without any participation of goodness?" "So it seemeth," quoth
  I. "What if there be some other evil annexed to this miserable man who
  is deprived of all goodness, besides those which make him miserable, is
  he not to be accounted much more unhappy than he whose misery is
  lightened by partaking of goodness?" "Why not?" quoth I. "But it is
  manifest that it is just that the wicked be punished, and unjust that
  they should go unpunished." "Who can deny that?" "But neither will any
  man deny this," quoth she, "that whatsoever is just, is good, and
  contrariwise, that whatsoever is unjust, is evil." "Certainly," I
  answered. "Then the wicked have some good annexed when they are
  punished, to wit, the punishment itself, which by reason of justice is
  good, and when they are not punished, they have a further evil, the very
  impunity which thou hast deservedly granted to be an evil because of its
  injustice." "I cannot deny it." "Wherefore the vicious are far more
  unhappy by escaping punishment unjustly, than by being justly punished."
  "This followeth," quoth I, "out of that which hath been concluded
  before.

  But I pray thee, leavest thou no punishments for the souls after the
  death of the body?" "And those great too," quoth she. "Some of which I
  think to be executed as sharp punishments, and others as merciful
  purgations.[ ] But I purpose not now to treat of those. But we have
  hitherto laboured that thou shouldest perceive the power of the wicked,
  which to thee seemed intolerable, to be none at all, and that thou
  shouldest see, that those whom thou complainedst went unpunished, do
  never escape without punishment for their wickedness. And that thou
  shouldest learn that the licence which thou wishedst might soon end, is
  not long, and yet the longer the more miserable, and most unhappy if it
  were everlasting. Besides, that the wicked are more wretched being
  permitted to escape with unjust impunity, than being punished with just
  severity. Out of which it followeth that they are then more grievously
  punished, when they are thought to go scot-free."

  "When I consider thy reasons," quoth I, "I think nothing can be said
  more truly. But if I return to the judgments of men, who is there that
  will think them worthy to be believed or so much as heard?" "It is
  true," quoth she, "for they cannot lift up their eyes accustomed to
  darkness, to behold the light of manifest truth, and they are like those
  birds whose sight is quickened by the night, and dimmed by the day. For
  while they look upon, not the order of things, but their own affections,
  they think that licence and impunity to sin is happy. But see what the
  eternal law establisheth. If thou apply thy mind to the better, thou
  needest no judge to reward thee: thou hast joined thyself to the more
  excellent things. If thou declinest to that which is worse, never expect
  any other to punish thee: thou hast put thyself in a miserable estate;
  as if by turns thou lookest down to the miry ground, and up to heaven,
  setting aside all outward causes, by the very law of sight thou seemest
  sometime to be in the dirt, and sometime present to the stars. But the
  common sort considereth not these things. What then? Shall we join
  ourselves to them whom we have proved to be like beasts? What if one
  having altogether lost his sight should likewise forget that he ever had
  any, and should think that he wanted nothing which belongeth to human
  perfection: should we likewise think them blind, that see as well as
  they saw before? For they will not grant that neither, which may be
  proved by as forcible reasons, that they are more unhappy that do injury
  than they which suffer it." "I would," quoth I, "hear these reasons."
  "Deniest thou," quoth she, "that every wicked man deserveth punishment?"
  "No." "And it is many ways clear that the vicious are miserable?" "Yes,"
  quoth I. "Then you do not doubt that those who deserve punishment are
  wretched?" "It is true," quoth I. "If then," quoth she, "thou wert to
  examine this cause, whom wouldest thou appoint to be punished, him that
  did or that suffered wrong?" "I doubt not," quoth I, "but that I would
  satisfy him that suffered with the sorrow of him that did it." "The
  offerer of the injury then would seem to thee more miserable than the
  receiver?" "It followeth," quoth I. "Hence therefore, and for other
  causes grounded upon that principle that dishonesty of itself maketh men
  miserable, it appeareth that the injury which is offered any man is not
  the receiver's but the doer's misery." "But now-a-days," quoth she,
  "orators take the contrary course. For they endeavour to draw the judges
  to commiseration of them who have suffered any grievous afflictions;
  whereas pity is more justly due to the causers thereof, who should be
  brought, not by angry, but rather by favourable and compassionate
  accusers to judgment, as it were sick men to a physician, that their
  diseases and faults might be taken away by punishments; by which means
  the defenders' labour would either wholly cease, or if they had rather
  do their clients some good, they would change their defence into
  accusations. And the wicked themselves, if they could behold virtue
  abandoned by them, through some little rift, and perceive that they
  might be delivered from the filth of sin by the affliction of
  punishments, obtaining virtue in exchange, they would not esteem of
  torments, and would refuse the assistance of their defenders, and wholly
  resign themselves to their accusers and judges. By which means it cometh
  to pass, that in wise men there is no place for hatred. For who but a
  very fool would hate the good? And to hate the wicked were against
  reason. For as faintness is a disease of the body, so is vice a sickness
  of the mind. Wherefore, since we judge those that have corporal
  infirmities to be rather worthy of compassion than of hatred, much more
  are they to be pitied, and not abhorred, whose minds are oppressed with
  wickedness, the greatest malady that may be.


  [ ] See discussion of this passage in _Boethius, An Essay,_ H. F.
  Stewart ( ), pp.   ff.




IV.

Quod tantos iuuat excitare motus
  Et propria fatum sollicitare manu?
Si mortem petitis, propinquat ipsa
  Sponte sua uolucres nec remoratur equos.
Quos serpens leo tigris ursus aper                                         
  Dente petunt, idem se tamen ense petunt.
An distant quia dissidentque mores,
  Iniustas acies et fera bella mouent
Alternisque uolunt perire telis?
  Non est iusta satis saeuitiae ratio.                                    
Vis aptam meritis uicem referre?
  Dilige iure bonos et miseresce malis."




  IV.

  Why should we strive to die so many ways,
    And slay ourselves with our own hands?
    If we seek death, she ready stands,
  She willing comes, her chariot never stays.
  Those against whom the wild beasts arméd be,
    Against themselves with weapons rage.[ ]
    Do they such wars unjustly wage,
  Because their lives and manners disagree,
  And so themselves with mutual weapons kill?
    Alas, but this revenge is small.
    Wouldst thou give due desert to all?
  Love then the good, and pity thou the ill."


  [ ] Literally, "Men whom serpent, lion, tiger, bear, and boar attack
  with tooth, yet attack each other with the sword."




V.

Hic ego: "Video," inquam, "quae sit uel felicitas uel miseria in ipsis
proborum atque improborum meritis constituta. Sed in hac ipsa fortuna
populari non nihil boni maliue inesse perpendo. Neque enim sapientum
quisquam exul inops ignominiosusque esse malit, potius quam pollens opibus,
honore reuerendus, potentia ualidus, in sua permanens urbe florere. Sic
enim clarius testatiusque sapientiae tractatur officium, cum in
contingentes populos regentium quodam modo beatitudo transfunditur, cum
praesertim carcer, nex[ ] ceteraque legalium tormenta poenarum
perniciosis potius ciuibus propter quos etiam constituta sunt debeantur.
Cur haec igitur uersa uice mutentur scelerumque supplicia bonos premant,
praemia uirtutum mali rapiant, uehementer admiror, quaeque tam iniustae
confusionis ratio uideatur ex te scire desidero. Minus etenim mirarer, si
misceri omnia fortuitis casibus crederem. Nunc stuporem meum deus rector
exaggerat. Qui cum saepe bonis iucunda, malis aspera contraque bonis dura
tribuat, malis optata concedat, nisi causa deprehenditur, quid est quod a
fortuitis casibus differre uideatur?" "Nec mirum," inquit, "si quid ordinis
ignorata ratione temerarium confusumque credatur. Sed tu quamuis causam
tantae dispositionis ignores, tamen quoniam bonus mundum rector temperat,
recte fieri cuncta ne dubites.


[ ] lex _plerique codd._




V.

  "I see," quoth I, "what felicity or misery is placed in the deserts of
  honest and dishonest men. But I consider that there is somewhat good or
  evil even in this popular fortune. For no wise man had rather live in
  banishment, poverty, and ignominy, than prosper in his own country,
  being rich, respected, and powerful. For in this manner is the office of
  wisdom performed with more credit and renown, when the governors'
  happiness is participated by the people about them; so chiefly because
  prisons, death, and other torments of legal punishments are rather due
  to pernicious subjects, for whom they were also ordained. Wherefore I
  much marvel why these things are thus turned upside down, and the
  punishments of wickedness oppress the good, while evil men obtain the
  rewards of the good. And I desire to know of thee what may seem to be
  the reason of so unjust confusion. For I would marvel less if I thought
  that all things were disordered by casual events. Now God being the
  Governor, my astonishment is increased. For since that He distributeth
  oftentimes that which is pleasant to the good, and that which is
  distasteful to the bad, and contrariwise adversity to the good, and
  prosperity to the evil, unless we find out the cause hereof, what
  difference may there seem to be betwixt this and accidental chances?"
  "It is no marvel," quoth she, "if anything be thought temerarious and
  confused, when we know not the order it hath. But although thou beest
  ignorant of the causes why things be so disposed, yet because the world
  hath a governor, doubt not but all things are well done.




V.

Si quis Arcturi sidera nescit
  Propinqua summo cardine labi,
Cur legat tardus plaustra Bootes
  Mergatque seras aequore flammas,
Cum nimis celeres explicet ortus,                                          
  Legem stupebit aetheris alti.
Palleant plenae cornua lunae
  Infecta metis noctis opacae
Quaeque fulgenti texerat ore
  Confusa Phoebe detegat astra,                                           
Commouet gentes publicus error
  Lassantque crebris pulsibus aera.
Nemo miratur flamina Cori
  Litus frementi tundere fluctu
Nec niuis duram frigore molem                                             
  Feruente Phoebi soluier aestu.
Hic enim causas cernere promptum est,
  Illic latentes pectora turbant.
Cuncta quae rara prouehit aetas
  Stupetque subitis mobile uulgus,                                        
Cedat inscitiae nubilus error,
  Cessent profecto mira uideri."




  V.

  Who knows not how the stars near to the poles do slide,
    And how Boötes his slow wain doth guide,
  And why he sets so late, and doth so early rise,
    May wonder at the courses of the skies.
  If when the moon is full her horns seem pale to sight,
    Infested with the darkness of the night,
  And stars from which all grace she with her brightness took,
    Now show themselves, while she doth dimly look,
  A public error straight through vulgar minds doth pass,
    And they with many strokes beat upon brass.[ ]
  None wonders why the winds upon the waters blow.
    Nor why hot Phoebus' beams dissolve the snow.
  These easy are to know, the other hidden lie,
    And therefore more our hearts they terrify.
  All strange events which time to light more seldom brings,
    And the vain people count as sudden things,
  If we our clouded minds from ignorance could free,
    No longer would by us admired be."


[ ] See Tylor's _Primitive Culture_, pp.   ff. Cf "carmina uel caelo
possunt deducere lunam," Virg. _Ecl._ viii.  , and Juvenal, _Sat._ vi.  
sq.




VI

"Ita est," inquam; "sed cum tui muneris sit latentium rerum causas euoluere
uelatasque caligine explicare rationes, quaeso uti quae hinc decernas.
quoniam hoc me miraculum maxime perturbat, edisseras." Tum illa paulisper
arridens: "Ad rem me," inquit, "omnium quaesitu maximam uocas, cui uix
exhausti quicquam satis sit. Talis namque materia est ut una dubitatione
succisa innumerabiles aliae uelut hydrae capita succrescant, nec ullus
fuerit modus, nisi quis eas uiuacissimo mentis igne coerceat. In hac enim
de prouidentiae simplicitate, de fati serie, de repentinis casibus, de
cognitione ac praedestinatione diuina, de arbitrii libertate quaeri solet,
quae quanti oneris sint ipse perpendis. Sed quoniam haec quoque te nosse
quaedam medicinae tuae portio est, quamquam angusto limite temporis saepti
tamen aliquid delibare[ ] conabimur. Quod si te musici carminis
oblectamenta delectant, hanc oportet paulisper differas uoluptatem, dum
nexas sibi ordine contexo rationes." "Vt libet," inquam. Tunc uelut ab alio
orsa principio ita disseruit: "Omnium generatio rerum cunctusque mutabilium
naturarum progressus et quidquid aliquo mouetur modo, causas, ordinem,
formas ex diuinae mentis stabilitate sortitur. Haec in suae simplicitatis
arce composita multiplicem rebus regendis modum statuit. Qui modus cum in
ipsa diuinae intellegentiae puritate conspicitur, prouidentia nominatur;
cum uero ad ea quae mouet atque disponit refertur, fatum a ueteribus
appellatum est. Quae diuersa esse facile liquebit, si quis utriusque uim
mente conspexerit. Nam prouidentia est ipsa illa diuina ratio in summo
omnium principe constituta quae cuncta disponit; fatum uero inhaerens rebus
mobilibus dispositio per quam prouidentia suis quaeque nectit ordinibus.
Prouidentia namque cuncta pariter quamuis diuersa quamuis infinita
complectitur; fatum uero singula digerit in motum locis formis ac
temporibus distributa, ut haec temporalis ordinis explicatio in diuinae
mentis adunata prospectum prouidentia sit, eadem uero adunatio digesta
atque explicata temporibus fatum uocetur. Quae licet diuersa sint, alterum
tamen pendet ex altero. Ordo namque fatalis ex prouidentiae simplicitate
procedit. Sicut enim artifex faciendae rei formam mente praecipiens mouet
operis effectum, et quod simpliciter praesentarieque prospexerat, per
temporales ordines ducit, ita deus prouidentia quidem singulariter
stabiliterque facienda disponit, fato uero haec ipsa quae disposuit
multipliciter ac temporaliter administrat. Siue igitur famulantibus
quibusdam prouidentiae diuinis spiritibus fatum exercetur seu anima seu
tota inseruiente natura seu caelestibus siderum motibus seu angelica
uirtute seu daemonum uaria sollertia seu aliquibus horum seu omnibus
fatalis series texitur, illud certe manifestum est immobilem simplicemque
gerendarum formam rerum esse prouidentiam, fatum uero eorum quae diuina
simplicitas gerenda disposuit mobilem nexum atque ordinem temporalem. Quo
fit ut omnia quae fato subsunt prouidentiae quoque subiecta sint cui ipsum
etiam subiacet fatum, quaedam uero quae sub prouidentia locata sunt fati
seriem superent. Ea uero sunt quae primae propinqua diuinitati stabiliter
fixa fatalis ordinem mobilitatis excedunt. Nam ut orbium circa eundem
cardinem sese uertentium qui est intimus ad simplicitatem medietatis
accedit ceterorumque extra locatorum ueluti cardo quidam circa quem
uersentur exsistit, extimus uero maiore ambitu rotatus quanto a puncti
media indiuiduitate discedit tanto amplioribus spatiis explicatur, si quid
uero illi se medio conectat et societ, in simplicitatem cogitur diffundique
ac diffluere cessat, simili ratione quod longius a prima mente discedit
maioribus fati nexibus implicatur ac tanto aliquid fato liberum est quanto
illum rerum cardinem uicinius petit. Quod si supernae mentis haeserit
firmitati, motu carens fati quoque supergreditur necessitatem. Igitur uti
est ad intellectum ratiocinatio, ad id quod est id quod gignitur, ad
aeternitatem tempus, ad punctum medium circulus, ita est fati series
mobilis ad prouidentiae stabilem simplicitatem. Ea series caelum ac sidera
mouet, elementa in se inuicem temperat et alterna commutatione transformat;
eadem nascentia occidentiaque omnia per similes fetuum seminumque renouat
progressus. Haec actus etiam fortunasque hominum indissolubili causarum
conexione constringit, quae cum ab immobilis prouidentiae proficiscatur
exordiis, ipsas quoque immutabiles esse necesse est. Ita enim res optime
reguntur, si manens in diuina mente simplicitas indeclinabilem causarum
ordinem promat. Hic uero ordo res mutabiles et alioquin temere fluituras
propria incommutabilitate coerceat. Quo fit ut tametsi uobis hunc ordinem
minime considerare ualentibus confusa omnia perturbataque uideantur, nihilo
minus tamen suus modus ad bonum dirigens cuncta disponat. Nihil est enim
quod mali causa ne ab ipsis quidem improbis fiat; quos, ut uberrime
demonstratum est, bonum quaerentes prauus error auertit, nedum ordo de
summi boni cardine proficiscens a suo quoquam deflectat exordio.

Quae uero, inquies, potest ulla iniquior esse confusio, quam ut bonis tum
aduersa tum prospera, malis etiam tum optata tum odiosa contingant? Num
igitur ea mentis integritate homines degunt, ut quos probos improbosue
censuerunt eos quoque uti existimant esse necesse sit? Atqui in hoc hominum
iudicia depugnant, et quos alii praemio alii supplicio dignos arbitrantur.
Sed concedamus ut aliquis possit bonos malosque discernere; num igitur
potent intueri illam intimam temperiem, uelut in corporibus dici solet,
animorum?  Non enim dissimile est miraculum nescienti cur sanis corporibus
his quidem dulcia illis uero amara conueniant, cur aegri etiam quidam
lenibus quidam uero acribus adiuuentur? At hoc medicus, qui sanitatis
ipsius atque aegritudinis modum temperamentumque dinoscit, minime miratur.
Quid uero aliud animorum salus uidetur esse quam probitas? Quid aegritudo
quam uitia? Quis autem alius uel seruator bonorum uel malorum depulsor quam
rector ac medicator mentium deus? Qui cum ex alta prouidentiae specula
respexit, quid unicuique conueniat agnoscit et quod conuenire nouit
accommodat. Hic iam fit illud fatalis ordinis insigne miraculum, cum ab
sciente geritur quod stupeant ignorantes. Nam ut pauca quae ratio ualet
humana de diuina profunditate perstringam, de hoc quem tu iustissimum et
aequi seruantissimum putas omnia scienti prouidentiae diuersum uidetur; et
uictricem quidem causam dis, uictam uero Catoni placuisse familiaris noster
Lucanus admonuit. Hic igitur quidquid citra spem uideas geri, rebus quidem
rectus ordo est, opinioni uero tuae peruersa confusio. Sed sit aliquis ita
bene moratus ut de eo diuinum iudicium pariter et humanum consentiat, sed
est animi uiribus infirmus; cui si quid eueniat aduersi, desinet colere
forsitan innocentiam per quam non potuit retinere fortunam. Parcit itaque
sapiens dispensatio ei quem deteriorem facere possit aduersitas, ne cui non
conuenit laborare patiatur. Est alius cunctis uirtutibus absolutus
sanctusque ac deo proximus; hunc contingi quibuslibet aduersis nefas
prouidentia iudicat adeo ut ne corporeis quidem morbis agitari sinat. Nam
ut quidam me quoque excellentior:

  [Greek: Andros dae ierou demas aitheres oikodomaesan.]

Fit autem saepe, uti bonis summa rerum regenda deferatur, ut exuberans
retundatur improbitas. Aliis mixta quaedam pro animorum qualitate
distribuit; quosdam remordet ne longa felicitate luxurient, alios
duris[ ] agitari ut uirtutes animi patientiae usu atque exercitatione
confirment. Alii plus aequo metuunt quod ferre possunt, alii plus aequo
despiciunt quod ferre non possunt; hos in experimentum sui tristibus ducit.
Nonnulli uenerandum saeculi nomen gloriosae pretio mortis emerunt: quidam
suppliciis inexpugnabiles exemplum ceteris praetulerunt inuictam malis esse
uirtutem. Quae quam recte atque disposite et ex eorum bono quibus accedere
uidentur fiant, nulla dubitatio est. Nam illud quoque, quod improbis nunc
tristia nunc optata proueniunt, ex eisdem ducitur causis; ac de tristibus
quidem nemo miratur, quod eos male meritos omnes existimant. Quorum quidem
supplicia tum ceteros ab sceleribus deterrent, tum ipsos quibus inuehuntur
emendant; laeta uero magnum bonis argumentum loquuntur, quid de huiusmodi
felicitate debeant iudicare quam famulari saepe improbis cernant.  In qua
re illud etiam dispensari credo, quod est forsitan alicuius tam praeceps
atque inportuna natura ut eum in scelera potius exacerbare possit rei
familiaris inopia; huius morbo prouidentia collatae pecuniae remedio
medetur. Hic foedatam probris conscientiam exspectans et se cum fortuna sua
comparans, forsitan pertimescit ne cuius ei iucundus usus est, sit tristis
amissio. Mutabit igitur mores ac dum fortunam metuit amittere; nequitiam
derelinquit. Alios in cladem meritam praecipitauit indigne acta felicitas;
quibusdam permissum puniendi ius, ut exercitii bonis et malis esset causa
supplicii. Nam ut probis atque improbis nullum foedus est, ita ipsi inter
se improbi nequeunt conuenire. Quidni, cum a semet ipsis discerpentibus
conscientiam uitiis quisque dissentiat faciantque saepe, quae cum gesserint
non fuisse gerenda decernant? Ex quo saepe summa illa prouidentia protulit
insigne miraculum, ut malos mali bonos facerent. Nam dum iniqua sibi a
pessimis quidam perpeti uidentur, noxiorum odio flagrantes ad uirtutis
frugem rediere, dum se eis dissimiles student esse quos oderant. Sola est
enim diuina uis cui mala quoque bona sint, cum eis competenter utendo
alicuius boni elicit effectum. Ordo enim quidam cuncta complectitur, ut
quod adsignata ordinis ratione decesserit, hoc licet in alium, tamen
ordinem relabatur, ne quid in regno prouidentiae liceat temeritati.

  [Greek: Argaleon de me tauta theon hos pant agoreuein.]

Neque enim fas est homini cunctas diuinae operae machinas uel ingenio
comprehendere uel explicare sermone. Hoc tantum perspexisse sufficiat, quod
naturarum omnium proditor deus idem ad bonum dirigens cuncta disponat,
dumque ea quae protulit in sui similitudinem retinere festinat, malum omne
de reipublicae suae terminis per fatalis seriem necessitatis eliminet. Quo
fit ut quae in terris abundare creduntur, si disponentem prouidentiam
spectes, nihil usquam mali esse perpendas. Sed uideo te iam dudum et
pondere quaestionis oneratum et rationis prolixitate fatigatum aliquam
carminis exspectare dulcedinem. Accipe igitur haustum quo refectus firmior
in ulteriora contendas.


[ ] deliberare _codd._; delibare _coni._ Pulmannus.

[ ] _Fortasse_ sinit _post_ duris _addendum est_.




VI.

  "It is true," quoth I, "but since it is thy profession to explicate the
  causes of hidden things, and to unfold the reasons which are covered
  with darkness, I beseech thee vouchsafe to declare what conclusion thou
  drawest from these things, for this miracle troubleth me above all
  others." Then she smiling a little said: "Thou invitest me to a matter
  which is most hardly found out, and can scarcely be sufficiently
  declared; for it is such that, one doubt being taken away, innumerable
  others, like the heads of Hydra, succeed, neither will they have any end
  unless a man repress them with the most lively fire of his mind. For in
  this matter are wont to be handled these questions: of the simplicity of
  Providence; of the course of Fate; of sudden chances; of God's knowledge
  and predestination, and of free will; which how weighty they are, thou
  thyself discerneth. But because it is part of thy cure to know these
  things also, though the time be short, yet we will endeavour to touch
  them briefly. But if the sweetness of verse delight thee, thou must
  forbear this pleasure for a while, until I propose unto thee some few
  arguments." "As it pleaseth thee," quoth I.

  Then taking as it were a new beginning, she discoursed in this manner:
  "The generation of all things, and all the proceedings of mutable
  natures, and whatsoever is moved in any sort, take their causes, order,
  and forms from the stability of the Divine mind. This, placed in the
  castle of its own simplicity, hath determined manifold ways for doing
  things; which ways being considered in the purity of God's
  understanding, are named Providence, but being referred to those things
  which He moveth and disposeth, they are by the ancients called Fate. The
  diversity of which will easily appear if we weigh the force of both. For
  Providence is the very Divine reason itself, seated in the highest
  Prince, which disposeth all things. But Fate is a disposition inherent
  in changeable things, by which Providence connecteth all things in their
  due order. For Providence embraceth all things together, though diverse,
  though infinite; but Fate putteth every particular thing into motion
  being distributed by places, forms, and time; so that this unfolding of
  temporal order being united into the foresight of God's mind is
  Providence, and the same uniting, being digested and unfolded in time,
  is called Fate. Which although they be diverse yet the one dependeth on
  the other. For fatal order proceedeth from the simplicity of Providence.
  For as a workman conceiving the form of anything in his mind taketh his
  work in hand, and executeth by order of time that which he had simply
  and in a moment foreseen, so God by His Providence disposeth whatsoever
  is to be done with simplicity and stability, and by Fate effecteth by
  manifold ways and in the order of time those very things which He
  disposeth. Wherefore, whether Fate be exercised by the subordination of
  certain Divine spirits to Providence, or this fatal web be woven by a
  soul or by the service of all nature, or by the heavenly motions of the
  stars, by angelical virtue, or by diabolical industry, or by some or all
  of these, that certainly is manifest that Providence is an immoveable
  and simple form of those things which are to be done, and Fate a
  moveable connexion and temporal order of those things which the Divine
  simplicity hath disposed to be done. So that all that is under Fate is
  also subject to Providence, to which also Fate itself obeyeth. But some
  things which are placed under Providence are above the course of Fate.
  And they are those things which nigh to the first Divinity, being stable
  and fixed, exceed the order of fatal mobility. For as of orbs which turn
  about the same centre, the inmost draweth nigh to the simplicity of the
  midst, and is as it were the hinge of the rest, which are placed without
  it, about which they are turned, and the outmost, wheeled with a greater
  compass, by how much it departeth from the middle indivisibility of the
  centre, is so much the more extended into larger spaces, but that which
  is joined and coupled to that middle approacheth to simplicity, and
  ceaseth to spread and flow abroad, in like manner that which departeth
  farthest from the first mind is involved more deeply in the meshes of
  Fate, and everything is so much the freer from Fate, by how much it
  draweth nigh to the hinge of all things. And if it sticketh to the
  stability of the Sovereign mind, free from motion, it surpasseth also
  the necessity of Fate. Wherefore in what sort discourse of reason is
  compared to pure understanding, that which is produced to that which is,
  time to eternity, a circle to the centre, such is the course of moveable
  Fate to the stable simplicity of Providence. That course moveth the
  heaven and stars, tempereth the elements one with another, and
  transformeth them by mutual changing. The same reneweth all rising and
  dying things by like proceeding of fruits and seeds. This comprehendeth
  also the actions and fortunes of men by an unloosable connexion of
  causes, which since it proceeds from the principles of unmovable
  Providence, the causes also must needs be immutable. For in this manner
  things are best governed, if the simplicity which remaineth in the
  Divine mind produceth an inflexible order of causes, and this order
  restraineth with its own immutability things otherwise mutable, and
  which would have a confused course. Whereof it ensueth that though all
  things seem confused and disordered to you, who are not able to consider
  this order, notwithstanding all things are disposed by their own proper
  measure directing them to good. For there is nothing which is done for
  the love of evil, even by the wicked themselves: whom, as hath been
  abundantly proved, lewd error carrieth away while they are seeking after
  that which is good, so far is it that order proceeding from the hinge of
  the Sovereign Goodness should avert any from his first beginning.

  But, thou wilt say, what more unjust confusion can there be than that
  both adversity and prosperity should happen to the good, and in like
  manner both desired and hateful things to the wicked? But are men so
  completely wise that whomsoever they judge wicked or honest must needs
  be so? How then are their censures contrary one to another, so that to
  divers the same men seem worthy of reward and punishment! But let us
  grant that some are able to discern the good from the evil. Can they
  therefore behold, as is wont to be said of bodies, that inward
  complexion of souls? For he that knoweth not the cause may marvel in
  like manner why some sound bodies agree better with sweet things and
  other with tart; and why some sick men are healed with gentle and some
  with sharper physic. But to a physician who knoweth the manner and
  temper both of health and sickness this is nothing strange. Now, what is
  the health of souls but virtue? What sickness have they but vices? And
  who either conserveth goodness or expelleth evils, but God the Ruler and
  Governor of men's minds? Who beholding from His high turret of
  providence seeth what is fitting for everyone, and applieth that which
  He knoweth to be most convenient. Here ariseth that strange wonder of
  fatal order, to wit that He that knoweth what is best, doth that which
  the ignorant admire. For to touch briefly some few things of the divine
  depth, which human reason is able to attain, he whom thou thinketh most
  just and most observant of equity, seemeth otherwise in the eyes of
  Providence which knoweth all. And our disciple Lucan noteth that the
  cause of conquerers pleased the gods, and that of the conquered,
  Cato.[ ] Wherefore whatsoever thou seest done here against thy
  expectation is right order in the things themselves, but a perverse
  confusion in thy opinion. But let there be one so well conditioned that
  God and men approve and praise him; yet perhaps he is so weak a minded
  man, that if he falleth into adversity, he will forsake his innocency,
  which was not able to keep him in prosperity. Wherefore God's wise
  dispensation spareth him that adversity might make worse, lest he should
  suffer to whom difficulties are dangerous.

  There is another complete in all virtues, a saint and high to God;
  Providence judgeth it a sacrilege to lay affliction on him, insomuch
  that she permitteth him not to be troubled so much as with corporal
  sickness. For as one that excelleth me saith 'the body of an holy man is
  builded of pure ether.'[ ] It happeneth often also that the chief
  command is given to good men, that wickedness, which otherwise would
  overflow all, may be kept down. She mixeth for others sour and sweet
  according to the disposition of their souls; she troubles some lest they
  should fall to dissolution by long prosperity, others are vexed with
  hardships, that they may confirm the forces of their mind with the use
  and exercise of patience. Some are too much afraid of that which they
  are able to bear. Others make less account than there is cause of that
  which they cannot endure. All these she affrayeth with afflictions that
  they make trial of themselves. Many have bought the renown of this world
  with a glorious death. Some, overcoming all torments, have showed by
  their example that virtues cannot be conquered by miseries, which things
  how well and orderly they are done, and how much to their good upon whom
  they are seen to fall, there can be no doubt. For that sometime
  grievous, sometime pleasant things befall in like manner the wicked,
  proceedeth from the same causes. And as for adversity no man marvelleth
  because all think they deserve ill. Whose punishments do both terrify
  others from the like courses, and move them to amend themselves. And
  their prosperity is a great argument to the good, what they ought to
  judge of this happiness which they see oftentimes bestowed upon the
  wicked. In which thing also is to be considered that peradventure some
  have so headlong and untoward a disposition, that poverty would rather
  make him worse; whose disease is cured by Providence, with giving him
  store of money. Another, knowing his own guilty conscience, and
  comparing his character with his own estate, is afraid lest the loss of
  that should be grievous unto him, the use of which is pleasant.
  Wherefore he resolveth to change his customs, and whiles he feareth to
  lose his prosperity, he forsaketh wickedness. The increase of honour
  undeservedly obtained hath thrown some headlong into their deserved
  destruction. Others are permitted to have authority to punish others,
  that they may exercise the good and punish the bad. For as there is no
  league between virtuous and wicked men, so neither can the wicked agree
  among themselves. Why not? Since they disagree within themselves by
  reason of their vices which tear their conscience, so that they many
  times do that which afterwards they wish undone. From whence that
  highest Providence often worketh that wonderful miracle, that evil men
  make those which are evil good. For some, considering the injustice done
  them by most wicked men, inflamed with hatred of evildoers have returned
  to the practice of virtue, procuring to be contrary to them whom they
  hate. For it is only a divine strength to which even evil things are
  good, when, by using them in due sort, it draweth some good effect out
  of them. For a certain order embraceth all things, so that even that
  which departeth from the order appointed to it, though it falleth into
  another, yet that is order also, lest confused rashness should bear any
  sway in the kingdom of Providence. 'But it is hard for me to rehearse
  all this as if I were a God.'[ ] For it is impossible for any man
  either to comprehend by his wit or to explicate in speech all the frame
  of God's work. Be it sufficient that we have seen thus much, that God,
  the author of all natures, directeth and disposeth all things to
  goodness, and while He endeavoureth to retain in His own likeness those
  things which He hath produced, He banisheth all evil from the bounds of
  His commonwealth, by the course of fatal necessity. So that if thou
  considerest the disposition of Providence, thou wilt perceive that evil,
  which is thought so to abound upon earth, hath no place left for it at
  all. But I see that long since burdened with so weighty a question, and
  wearied with my long discourse, thou expectest the delight of verses;
  wherefore take a draught, that, being refreshed, thou mayest be able to
  go forward.


  [ ] _Pharsal_. i.  .

  [ ] Source unknown.

  [ ] Homer, _Il._ xii.  .




VI.

Si uis celsi iura tonantis
Pura sollers cernere mente,
Aspice summi culmina caeli.
Illic iusto foedere rerum
Veterem seruant sidera pacem.                                              
Non sol rutilo concitus igne
Gelidum Phoebes impedit axem
Nec quae summo uertice mundi
Flectit rapidos Vrsa meatus.
Numquam occiduo lota profundo                                             
Cetera cernens sidera mergi
Cupit oceano tingere flammas.
Semper uicibus temporis aequis
Vesper seras nuntiat umbras
Reuehitque diem Lucifer almum.                                            
Sic aeternos reficit cursus
Alternus amor, sic astrigeris
Bellum discors exulat oris.
Haec concordia temperat aequis
Elementa modis, ut pugnantia                                              
Vicibus cedant umida siccis
Iungantque fidem frigora flammis
Pendulus ignis surgat in altum
Terraeque graues pondere sidant.
Isdem causis uere tepenti                                                 
Spirat florifer annus odores,
Aestas Cererem feruida siccat,
Remeat pomis grauis autumnus,
Hiemem defluus inrigat imber.
Haec temperies alit ac profert                                            
Quidquid uitam spirat in orbe.
Eadem rapiens condit et aufert
Obitu mergens orta supremo.
Sedet interea conditor altus
Rerumque regens flectit habenas                                           
Rex et dominus fons et origo
Lex et sapiens arbiter aequi
Et quae motu concitat ire,
Sistit retrahens ac uaga firmat.
Nam nisi rectos reuocans itus                                             
Flexos iterum cogat in orbes,
Quae nunc stabilis continet ordo
Dissaepta suo fonte fatiscant.
Hic est cunctis communis amor
Repetuntque boni fine teneri,                                             
Quia non aliter durare queant,
Nisi conuerso rursus amore
Refluant causae quae dedit esse.




VI.

      If thou would'st see
    God's laws with purest mind,
    Thy sight on heaven must fixéd be,
  Whose settled course the stars in peace doth bind.
      The sun's bright fire
    Stops not his sister's team,
    Nor doth the northern bear desire
  Within the ocean's wave to hide her beam.
      Though she behold
    The other stars there couching,
    Yet she uncessantly is rolled
  About high heaven, the ocean never touching.
      The evening light
    With certain course doth show
    The coming of the shady night,
  And Lucifer before the day doth go.
      This mutual love
    Courses eternal makes,
    And from the starry spheres above
  All cause of war and dangerous discord takes.
      This sweet consent
    In equal bands doth tie
    The nature of each element,
  So that the moist things yield unto the dry,
      The piercing cold
    With flames doth friendship keep,
    The trembling fire the highest place doth hold,
  And the gross earth sinks down into the deep.
      The flowery year
    Breathes odours in the spring
    The scorching summer corn doth bear,
  The autumn fruit from laden trees doth bring.
      The falling rain
    Doth winter's moisture give.
    These rules thus nourish and maintain
  All creatures which we see on earth to live.
      And when they die,
    These bring them to their end,
    While their Creator sits on high,
  Whose hand the reins of the whole world doth bend.
      He as their King
    Rules them with lordly might.
    From Him they rise, flourish, and spring,
  He as their law and judge decides their right.
      Those things whose course
    Most swiftly glides away
    His might doth often backward force,
  And suddenly their wandering motion stay.
      Unless His strength
    Their violence should bound,
    And them which else would run at length,
  Should bring within the compass of a round,
      That firm decree
    Which now doth all adorn
    Would soon destroyed and broken be,
  Things being far from their beginning borne.
      This powerful love
    Is common unto all,
    Which for desire of good do move
  Back to the springs from whence they first did fall.
      No worldly thing
    Can a continuance have
    Unless love back again it bring
  Unto the cause which first the essence gave.




VII.

Iamne igitur uides quid haec omnia quae diximus consequatur?" "Quidnam?"
inquam. "Omnem," inquit, "bonam prorsus esse fortunam." "Et qui id,"
inquam, "fieri potest?" "Attende," inquit. "Cum omnis fortuna uel iucunda
uel aspera tum remunerandi exercendiue bonos tum puniendi corrigendiue
improbos causa deferatur, omnis bona quam uel iustam constat esse uel
utilem." "Nimis quidem," inquam, "uera ratio et si quam paulo ante docuisti
prouidentiam fatumue considerem, firmis uiribus nixa sententia. Sed eam si
placet inter eas quas inopinabiles paulo ante posuisti numeremus." "Qui?"
inquit. "Quia id hominum sermo communis usurpat et quidem crebro quorundam
malam esse fortunam." "Visne igitur," inquit, "paulisper uulgi sermonibus
accedamus, ne nimium uelut ab humanitatis usu recessisse uideamur?" "Vt
placet," inquam. "Nonne igitur bonum censes esse quod prodest?" "Ita est,"
inquam, "Quae uero aut exercet aut corrigit, prodest?" "Fateor," inquam.
"Bona igitur?" "Quidni?" "Sed haec eorum est qui uel in uirtute positi
contra aspera bellum gerunt, uel a uitiis declinantes uirtutis iter
arripiunt." "Negare," inquam, "nequeo." "Quid uero iucunda, quae in
praemium tribuitur bonis, num uulgus malam esse decernit?" "Nequaquam;
uerum uti est ita quoque esse optimam censet." "Quid reliqua, quae cum sit
aspera, iusto supplicio malos coercet, num bonam populus putat?" "Immo
omnium," inquam, "quae excogitari possunt, iudicat esse miserrimam." "Vide
igitur ne opinionem populi sequentes quiddam ualde inopinabile
confecerimus." "Quid?" inquam. "Ex his enim," ait, "quae concessa sunt,
euenit eorum quidem qui uel sunt uel in possessione uel in prouectu uel in
adeptione uirtutis, omnem quaecumque sit bonam, in improbitate uero
manentibus omnem pessimam esse fortunam." "Hoc," inquam, "uerum est,
tametsi nemo audeat confiteri." "Quare," inquit, "ita uir sapiens moleste
ferre non debet, quotiens in fortunae certamen adducitur, ut uirum fortem
non decet indignari, quotiens increpuit bellicus tumultus; utrique enim,
huic quidem gloriae propagandae illi uero conformandae sapientiae,
difficultas ipsa materia est. Ex quo etiam uirtus uocatur quod suis uiribus
nitens non superetur aduersis. Neque enim uos in prouectu positi uirtutis
diffluere deliciis et emarcescere uoluptate uenistis. Proelium cum omni
fortuna nimis[ ] acre conseritis, ne uos aut tristis opprimat aut iucunda
corrumpat. Firmis medium uiribus occupate! Quidquid aut infra subsistit aut
ultra progreditur, habet contemptum felicitatis, non habet praemium
laboris. In uestra enim situm manu qualem uobis fortunam formare malitis;
omnis enim quae uidetur aspera nisi aut exercet aut corrigit punit.


[ ] animis _codd. meliores._




  VII.

  Perceivest thou now what followeth of all that we have hitherto said?"
  "What?" quoth I. "That," quoth she, "all manner of fortune is good."
  "How can that be?" quoth I. "Be attentive," quoth she; "since that all
  fortune, be it pleasing or unpleasing, is directed to the reward or
  exercise of the good, and to the punishment and direction of the wicked,
  it is manifest it is all good, since all is just or profitable." "Thy
  reason is very true," quoth I, "and if I consider Providence and Fate,
  which thou didst explicate a little before, thy opinion is well
  grounded. But if thou pleasest let us account it among those which thou
  not long since supposest incredible." "Why?" quoth she. "Because men
  commonly use to say and repeat that some have ill fortune." "Shall we,"
  quoth she, "frame our speech to the vulgar phrase, lest we seem to have
  as it were forsaken the use of human conversation?" "As it pleaseth
  thee," quoth I. "Dost thou not think then that that is good which is
  profitable?" "Yes," quoth I. "But that fortune which either exerciseth
  or correcteth is profitable?" "It is true," quoth I. "It is good then?"
  "Why not?" "But this is the estate of them who being either virtuous
  strive with adversity, or forsaking vices betake themselves to the way
  of virtue." "I cannot deny it," quoth I. "Now, what sayest thou to that
  pleasing fortune which is given in reward to the good, doth the common
  people account it bad?" "No, but judgeth it exceeding good, as it is
  indeed." "And what of the other which, being unpleasing, restraineth the
  evil with just punishment, doth not the people think it good?" "Nay,"
  quoth I, "they think it the most miserable that can be." "Look then,"
  quoth she, "how, following the people's opinion, we have concluded a
  very incredible matter." "What?" quoth I. "For it followeth," quoth she,
  "out of that which is granted, that all their fortune, whatsoever it be,
  who are either in the possession or increase or entrance of virtue, is
  good: and theirs, which remain in vices, the worst that may be." "This,"
  quoth I, "is true, though none dare say so." "Wherefore," quoth she, "a
  wise man must be no more troubled when he is assaulted with adversity,
  than a valiant captain dismayed at the sound of an alarum. For
  difficulties are the matter by which the one must extend his glory, and
  the other increase his wisdom. For which cause virtue is so called,
  because it hath sufficient strength to overcome adversity.[ ] For
  you, that are proficients in virtue, are not come hither to be dissolute
  with dainties or to languish in pleasures. You skirmish fiercely with
  any fortune, lest either affliction oppress you or prosperity corrupt
  you. Stay yourselves strongly in the mean! For whatsoever cometh either
  short, or goeth beyond, may well contemn felicity, but will never obtain
  any reward of labour. For it is placed in your power to frame to
  yourselves what fortune you please. For all that seemeth unsavoury
  either exerciseth or correcteth or punisheth.


  [ ] Boethius shows his independence in adopting for _uirtus_ a
  different etymology from that given by Cicero, viz. _uir_ (of.  
  _Tusoul._ xviii.).




VII.

Bella bis quinis operatus annis
Vltor Atrides Phrygiae ruinis
Fratris amissos thalamos piauit;
Ille dum Graiae dare uela classi
Optat et uentos redimit cruore,                                            
Exuit patrem miserumque tristis
Foederat natae iugulum sacerdos.
Fleuit amissos Ithacus sodales
Quos ferus uasto recubans in antro
Mersit inmani Polyphemus aluo;                                            
Sed tamen caeco furibundus ore
Gaudium maestis lacrimis rependit.
Herculem duri celebrant labores.
Ille Centauros domuit superbos,
Abstulit saeuo spolium leoni                                              
Fixit et certis uolucres sagittis,
Poma cernenti rapuit draconi
Aureo laeuam grauior metallo,
Cerberum traxit triplici catena.
Victor immitem posuisse fertur                                            
Pabulum saeuis dominum quadrigis.
Hydra combusto periit ueneno,
Fronte turpatus Achelous amnis
Ora demersit pudibunda ripis.
Strauit Antaeum Libycis harenis,                                          
Cacus Euandri satiauit iras
Quosque pressurus foret altus orbis
Saetiger spumis umeros notauit.
Vltimus caelum[ ] labor inreflexo
Sustulit collo pretiumque rursus                                          
Vltimi caelum meruit laboris.
Ite nunc fortes ubi celsa magni
Ducit exempli uia! Cur inertes
Terga nudatis? Superata tellus
Sidera donat."                                                            


[ ] caelo _codd. mellores._




  VII.

    Revengeful Atreus' son did ten whole years employ
  In wars, till he his brother's loss repaid with ransacked Troy.
    He setting forth the fleet of Greece upon the seas,
  And knowing well that only blood the angry winds would please,
    Forgot a father's part, and with his cruel knife
  Unto the gods did sacrifice his dearest daughter's life.
    Ulysses wailed the loss of his most faithful men,
  Whom Polyphemus did devour enclosed in his den
    But when his hands by sleight had made the Cyclops blind,
  Most pleasant joy instead of former tears possessed his mind.
    Hercules famous is for his laborious toil,
  Who tamed the Centaurs and did take the dreadful lion's spoil.
    He the Stymphalian birds with piercing arrows strook,
  And from the watchful dragon's care the golden apples took.[ ]
    He in a threefold chain the hellish porter led,
  And with their cruel master's flesh the savage horses fed.
    He did th' increasing heads of poisonous Hydra burn,
  And breaking Achelous' horns, did make him back return.[ ]*
    He on the Libyan sands did proud Antaeus kill,
  And with the mighty Cacus' blood Euander's wrath fulfil.
    That world-uplifting back the boar's white foam did fleck.
  To hold on high the sphere of heaven with never bending neck
    Of all his many toils the last was, and most hard,
  And for this last and greatest toil the heaven was his reward.
    You gallant men pursue this way of high renown,
  Why yield you? Overcome the earth, and you the stars shall crown,"


  [ ] Literally, "his left hand weighted with the golden metal."

  [ ] Lit. "The river Achelous dishonoured in his brow (by the loss of
  his horns) buried his shame-stricken face in his banks."






ANICII MANLII SEVERINI BOETHII

V.C. ET INL. EXCONS. ORD. EX MAG. OFF. PATRICII

PHILOSOPHIAE CONSOLATIONIS

LIBER QVARTVS EXPLICIT

INCIPIT LIBER V.




I.

Dixerat orationisque cursum ad alia quaedam tractanda atque expedienda
uertebat. Tum ego: "Recta quidem," inquam, "exhortatio tuaque prorsus
auctoritate dignissima, sed quod tu dudum de prouidentia quaestionem
pluribus aliis implicitam esse dixisti, re experior. Quaero enim an esse
aliquid omnino et quidnam esse casum arbitrere." Tum illa: "Festino,"
inquit; "debitum promissionis absoluere uiamque tibi qua patriam reueharis
aperire. Haec autem etsi perutilia cognitu tamen a propositi nostri tramite
paulisper auersa sunt, uerendumque est ne deuiis fatigatus ad emetiendum
rectum iter sufficere non possis." "Ne id," inquam, "prorsus uereare. Nam
quietis mihi loco fuerit ea quibus maxime delector agnoscere, simul cum
omne disputationis tuae latus indubitata fide constiterit, nihil de
sequentibus ambigatur." Tum illa: "Morem," inquit, "geram tibi," simulque
sic orsa est: "Si quidem," inquit, "aliquis euentum temerario motu nullaque
causarum conexione productum casum esse definiat, nihil omnino casum esse
confirmo et praeter subiectae rei significationem inanem prorsus uocem esse
decerno. Quis enim coercente in ordinem cuncta deo locus esse ullus
temeritati reliquus potest? Nam nihil ex nihilo exsistere uera sententia
est cui nemo umquam ueterum refragatus est, quamquam id illi non de
operante principio, sed de materiali subiecto hoc omnium de natura rationum
quasi quoddam iecerint fundamentum. At si nullis ex causis aliquid oriatur,
id de nihilo ortum esse uidebitur. Quod si hoc fieri nequit, ne casum
quidem huiusmodi esse possibile est qualem paulo ante definiuimus." "Quid
igitur," inquam, "nihilne est quod uel casus uel fortuitum iure appellari
queat? An est aliquid, tametsi uulgus lateat, cui uocabula ista
conueniant?" "Aristoteles meus id," inquit, "in Physicis et breui et ueri
propinqua ratione definiuit."  "Quonam," inquam "modo?" "Quotiens," ait,
"aliquid cuiuspiam rei gratia geritur aliudque quibusdam de causis quam
quod intendebatur obtingit, casus uocatur, ut si quis colendi agri causa
fodiens humum defossi auri pondus inueniat. Hoc igitur fortuito quidem
creditur accidisse, uerum non de nihilo est; nam proprias causas habet
quarum inprouisus inopinatusque concursus casum uidetur operatus.  Nam nisi
cultor agri humum foderet, nisi eo loci pecuniam suam depositor obruisset,
aurum non esset inuentum. Haec sunt igitur fortuiti causa compendii, quod
ex obuiis sibi et confluentibus causis, non ex gerentis intentione
prouenit. Neque enim uel qui aurum obruit uel qui agrum exercuit ut ea
pecunia reperiretur intendit; sed uti dixi, quo ille obruit hunc fodisse
conuenit atque concurrit. Licet igitur definire casum esse inopinatum ex
confluentibus causis in his quae ob aliquid geruntur euentum; concurrere
uero atque confluere causas facit ordo ille ineuitabili conexione
procedens; qui de prouidentiae fonte descendens cuncta suis locis
temporibusque disponit.






  THE FIFTH BOOK OF BOETHIUS




  I.

  Having said thus, she began to turn her speech to treat and explicate
  certain other questions, when I interrupted her, saying: "Thy
  exhortation is very good, and well-seeming thy authority. But I find it
  true by experience, as thou affirmedst, that the question of Providence
  is entangled with many other. For I desire to know whether thou thinkest
  chance to be anything at all, and what it is." "I make haste," quoth
  she, "to perform my promise, and to show thee the way by which thou
  mayest return to thy country. But these other questions, though they be
  very profitable, yet they are somewhat from our purpose, and it is to be
  feared lest being wearied with digressions thou beest not able to finish
  thy direct journey." "There is no fear of that," quoth I, "for it will
  be a great ease to me to understand those things in which I take great
  delight, and withal, when thy disputation is fenced in on every side
  with sure conviction, there can be no doubt made of anything thou shalt
  infer." "I will," quoth she, "do as thou wouldst me have," and withal
  began in this manner. "If any shall define chance to be an event
  produced by a confused motion, and without connexion of causes, I affirm
  that there is no such thing, and that chance is only an empty voice that
  hath beneath it no real signification. For what place can confusion
  have, since God disposeth all things in due order? For it is a true
  sentence that of nothing cometh nothing, which none of the ancients
  denied, though they held not that principle of the efficient cause, but
  of the material subject, laying it down as in a manner the ground of all
  their reasonings concerning nature. But if anything proceedeth from no
  causes, that will seem to have come from nothing, which if it cannot be,
  neither is it possible there should be any such chance as is defined a
  little before." "What then," quoth I, "is there nothing that can rightly
  be called chance or fortune? Or is there something, though unknown to
  the common sort, to which these names agree?" "My Aristotle," quoth she,
  "in his _Books of Nature_[ ] declared this point briefly and very
  near the truth." "How?" quoth I. "When," quoth she, "anything is done
  for some certain cause, and some other thing happeneth for other reasons
  than that which was intended, this is called chance; as if one digging
  his ground with intention to till it, findeth an hidden treasure. This
  is thought to have fallen thus out by fortune, but it is not of nothing,
  for it hath peculiar causes whose unexpected and not foreseen concourse
  seemeth to have brought forth a chance. For unless the husbandman had
  digged up his ground, and unless the other had hidden his money in that
  place, the treasure had not been found. These are therefore the causes
  of this fortunate accident, which proceedeth from the meeting and
  concourse of causes, and not from the intention of the doer. For neither
  he that hid the gold nor he that tilled his ground had any intention
  that the money should be found, but, as I said, it followed and
  concurred that this man should dig up in the place where the other hid.
  Wherefore, we may define chance thus: That it is an unexpected event of
  concurring causes in those things which are done to some end and
  purpose. Now the cause why causes so concur and meet so together, is
  that order proceeding with inevitable connexion, which, descending from
  the fountain of Providence, disposeth all things in their places and
  times.


  [ ] _Phys._ ii.  .




I.

Rupis Achaemeniae scopulis ubi uersa sequentum
  Pectoribus figit spicula pugna fugax,
Tigris et Euphrates uno se fonte resoluunt
  Et mox abiunctis dissociantur aquis.
Si coeant cursumque iterum reuocentur in unum,                             
  Confluat alterni quod trahit unda uadi;
Conuenient puppes et uulsi flumine trunci
  Mixtaque fortuitos implicet unda modos,
Quos tamen ipsa uagos terrae decliuia casus
  Gurgitis et lapsi defluus ordo regit.                                   
Sic quae permissis fluitare uidetur habenis
  Fors patitur frenos ipsaque lege meat."




  I.

  In the Achaemenian rocks, where Parthians with their darts
  In their dissembled flight do wound their enemies,
  Tigris from the same head doth with Euphrates rise,
  And forthwith they themselves divide in several parts;
  But if they join again, and them one channel bound,
  Bringing together all that both their waves do bear;
  The ships and trees, whose roots they from the bank do tear,
  Will meet, and they their floods will mingle and confound,
  Yet run this wandering course in places which are low,
  And in these sliding streams a settled law remains.[ ]
  So fortune, though it seems to run with careless reins,
  Yet hath it certain rule, and doth in order flow."


  [ ] Lit. "Yet all these (apparently) random happenings are governed by
  the shelving ground and the flowing course of the stream as it runs."




II.

"Animaduerto," inquam, "idque, uti tu dicis, ita esse consentio. Sed in hac
haerentium sibi serie causarum estne ulla nostri arbitrii libertas an ipsos
quoque humanorum motus animorum fatalis catena constringit?" "Est," inquit,
"neque enim fuerit ulla rationalis natura quin eidem libertas adsit
arbitrii. Nam quod ratione uti naturaliter potest id habet iudicium quo
quidque discernat; per se igitur fugienda optandaue dinoscit. Quod uero
quis optandum esse iudicat petit; refugit uero quod aestimat esse
fugiendum. Quare quibus in ipsis inest ratio, inest etiam uolendi
nolendique libertas. Sed hanc non in omnibus aequam esse constituo. Nam
supernis diuinisque substantiis et perspicax iudicium et incorrupta
uoluntas et efficax optatorum praesto est potestas. Humanas uero animas
liberiores quidem esse necesse est cum se in mentis diuinae speculatione
conseruant, minus uero cum dilabuntur ad corpora, minusque etiam, cum
terrenis artubus colligantur. Extrema uero est seruitus, cum uitiis deditae
rationis propriae possessione ceciderunt. Nam ubi oculos a summae luce
ueritatis ad inferiora et tenebrosa deiecerint, mox inscitiae nube
caligant, perniciosis turbantur affectibus quibus accedendo consentiendoque
quam inuexere sibi adiuuant seruitutem et sunt quodam modo propria
libertate captiuae. Quae tamen ille ab aeterno cuncta prospiciens
prouidentiae cernit intuitus et suis quaeque meritis praedestinata
disponit.




  II.

  "I observe it," quoth I, "and I acknowledge it to be as thou sayest. But
  in this rank of coherent causes, have we any free-will, or doth the
  fatal chain fasten also the motions of men's minds?" "We have," quoth
  she, "for there can be no reasonable nature, unless it be endued with
  free-will. For that which naturally hath the use of reason hath also
  judgment by which it can discern of everything by itself, wherefore of
  itself it distinguished betwixt those things which are to be avoided,
  and those which are to be desired. Now every one seeketh for that which
  he thinketh is to be desired, and escheweth that which in his judgment
  is to be avoided. Wherefore, they which have reason in themselves have
  freedom to will and nill. But yet I consider not this equal in all. For
  the supreme and divine substances have both a perspicuous judgment and
  an uncorrupted will, and an effectual power to obtain their desires. But
  the minds of men must needs be more free when they conserve themselves
  in the contemplation of God, and less when they come to their bodies,
  and yet less when they are bound with earthly fetters. But their
  greatest bondage is when, giving themselves to vices, they lose
  possession of their own reason. For, having cast their eyes from the
  light of the sovereign truth to inferior obscurities, forthwith they are
  blinded with the cloud of ignorance, molested with hurtful affections,
  by yielding and consenting to which they increase the bondage which they
  laid upon themselves, and are, after a certain manner, captives by their
  own freedom. Which notwithstanding that foresight of Providence which
  beholdeth all things from eternity, foreseeth, and by predestination
  disposeth of everything by their merits.




II.

[Greek: Pant' ephoran kai pant' epakouein][ ]
Puro clarum lumine Phoebum
Melliflui canit oris Homerus:
Qui tamen intima uiscera terrae
Non ualet aut pelagi radiorum                                              
Infirma perrumpere luce.
Haud sic magni conditor orbis;
Huic ex alto cuncta tuenti
Nulla terrae mole resistunt,
Non nox atris nubibus obstat.                                             
Quae sint, quae fuerint ueniantque
Vno mentis cernit in ictu;
Quem, quia respicit omnia solus,
Verum possis dicere solem."


[ ] disponit [Greek: Pant' ephoron kai pant' epakogon] _sic Peiper et
similiter editores priores. Versum in rectum locum Engelbrecht restituit,
quam quidem emendationem noster interpres uidetur praesensisse._




  II.

    Sweet Homer[ ] sings the praise
    Of Phoebus clear and bright,
    And yet his strongest rays
    Cannot with feeble light
    Cast through the secret ways
    Of earth and seas his sight,
  Though 'all lies open to his eyes.'[ ]
  But He who did this world devise--

    The earth's vast depths unseen
    From his sight are not free,
    No clouds can stand between,
    He at one time doth see
    What are, and what have been,
    And what shall after be.
  Whom, since he only vieweth all,
  You rightly the true Sun may call."


  [ ] Cf. _Il._ iv.  , _Od._ xii.  .

  [ ] This line renders the Greek with which Boethius begins the poem,
  adapting Homer's phrase "all surveying, all o'erhearing." See the
  critical note on p.  .




III.

Tum ego: "En," inquam, "difficiliore rursus ambiguitate confundor."
"Quaenam," inquit, "ista est? Iam enim quibus perturbere coniecto."
"Nimium," inquam, "aduersari ac repugnare uidetur praenoscere uniuersa deum
et esse ullum libertatis arbitrium. Nam si cuncta prospicit deus neque
falli ullo modo potest, euenire necesse est quod prouidentia futurum esse
praeuiderit. Quare si ab aeterno non facta hominum modo sed etiam consilia
uoluntatesque praenoscit, nulla erit arbitrii libertas; neque enim uel
factum aliud ullum uel quaelibet exsistere poterit uoluntas nisi quam
nescia falli prouidentia diuina praesenserit. Nam si aliorsum quam prouisae
sunt detorqueri ualent, non iam erit futuri firma praescientia, sed opinio
potius incerta, quod de deo credere nefas iudico. Neque enim illam probo
rationem qua se quidam credunt hunc quaestionis nodum posse dissoluere.
Aiunt enim non ideo quid esse euenturum, quoniam id prouidentia futurum
esse prospexerit, sed e contrario potius, quoniam quid futurum est, id
diuinam prouidentiam latere non posse eoque modo necessarium hoc in
contrariam relabi partem, neque enim necesse esse contingere quae
prouidentur, sed necesse esse quae futura sunt prouideri--quasi uero quae
cuius rei causa sit praescientiane futurorum necessitatis an futurorum
necessitas prouidentiae laboretur, ac non illud demonstrare nitamur, quoquo
modo sese habeat ordo causarum, necessarium esse euentum praescitarum
rerum, etiam si praescientia futuris rebus eueniendi necessitatem non
uideatur inferre. Etenim si quispiam sedeat, opinionem quae eum sedere
coniectat ueram esse necesse est; atque e conuerso rursus, si de quopiam
uera sit opinio quoniam sedet, eum sedere necesse est. In utroque igitur
necessitas inest, in hoc quidem sedendi, at uero in altero ueritatis. Sed
non idcirco quisque sedet quoniam uera est opinio, sed haec potius uera est
quoniam quempiam sedere praecessit. Ita cum causa ueritatis ex altera parte
procedat, inest tamen communis in utraque necessitas.

Similia de prouidentia futurisque rebus ratiocinari patet. Nam etiam si
idcirco quoniam futura sunt, prouidentur, non uero ideo quoniam prouidentur
eueniunt, nihilo minus tamen ab deo uel uentura prouideri uel prouisa
necesse est euenire,[ ] quod ad perimendam arbitrii libertatem solum
satis est. Iam uero quam praeposterum est ut aeternae praescientiae
temporalium rerum euentus causa esse dicatur! Quid est autem aliud
arbitrari ideo deum futura quoniam sunt euentura prouidere, quam putare
quae olim acciderunt causam summae illius esse prouidentiae? Ad haec sicuti
cum quid esse scio, id ipsum esse necesse est, ita cum quid futurum noui,
id ipsum futurum esse necesse est. Sic fit igitur ut euentus praescitae rei
nequeat euitari. Postremo si quid aliquis aliorsum atque sese res habet
existimet, id non modo scientia non est, sed est opinio fallax ab scientiae
ueritate longe diuersa. Quare si quid ita futurum est ut eius certus ac
necessarius non sit euentus, id euenturum esse praesciri qui poterit? Sicut
enim scientia ipsa impermixta est falsitati, ita id quod ab ea concipitur
esse aliter atque concipitur nequit. Ea namque causa est cur mendacio
scientia careat, quod se ita rem quamque habere necesse est uti eam sese
habere scientia comprehendit. Quid igitur? Quonam modo deus haec incerta
futura praenoscit? Nam si ineuitabiliter euentura censet quae etiam non
euenire possibile est, fallitur; quod non sentire modo nefas est, sed etiam
uoce proferre. At si ita uti sunt, ita ea futura esse decernit, ut aeque
uel fieri ea uel non fieri posse cognoscat, quae est haec praescientia quae
nihil certum nihil stabile comprehendit? Aut quid hoc refert uaticinio illo
ridiculo Tiresiae?

  Quidquid dicam, aut erit aut non.

Quid etiam diuina prouidentia humana opinione praestiterit; si uti homines
incerta iudicat quorum est incertus euentus? Quod si apud illum rerum
omnium certissimum fontem nihil incerti esse potest, certus eorum est
euentus quae futura firmiter ille praescierit. Quare nulla est humanis
consiliis actionibusque libertas quas diuina mens sine falsitatis errore
cuncta prospiciens ad unum alligat et constringit euentum. Quo semel
recepto quantus occasus humanarum rerum consequatur liquet. Frustra enim
bonis malisque praemia poenaeue proponuntur quae nullus meruit liber ac
uoluntarius motus animorum. Idque omnium uidebitur iniquissimum quod nunc
aequissimum iudicatur uel puniri improbos uel remunerari probos quos ad
alterutrum non propria mittit uoluntas, sed futuri cogit certa necessitas.
Nec uitia igitur nec uirtutes quidquam fuerint, sed omnium meritorum potius
mixta atque indiscreta confusio. Quoque nihil sceleratius excogitari
potest, cum ex prouidentia rerum omnis ordo ducatur nihilque consiliis
liceat humanis, fit ut uitia quoque nostra ad bonorum omnium referantur
auctorem. Igitur nec sperandi aliquid nec deprecandi ulla ratio est. Quid
enim uel speret quisque uel etiam deprecetur, quando optanda omnia series
indeflexa conectit? Auferetur igitur unicum illud inter homines deumque
commercium sperandi scilicet ac deprecandi. Si quidem iustae humilitatis
pretio inaestimabilem uicem diuinae gratiae promeremur, qui solus modus est
quo cum deo colloqui homines posse uideantur illique inaccessae luci prius
quoque quam impetrent ipsa supplicandi ratione coniungi. Quae si recepta
futurorum necessitate nihil uirium habere credantur, quid erit quo summo
illi rerum principi conecti atque adhaerere possimus? Quare necesse erit
humanum genus, uti paulo ante cantabas, dissaeptum atque disiunctum suo
fonte fatiscere.


[ ] euenire prouisa _codd. meliores._




  III.

  Then I complained that I was now in a greater confusion and more
  doubtful difficulty than before. "What is that?" quoth she, "for I
  already conjecture what it is that troubleth thee." "It seemeth," quoth
  I, "to be altogether impossible and repugnant that God foreseeth all
  things, and that there should be any free-will. For if God beholdeth all
  things and cannot be deceived, that must of necessity follow which His
  providence foreseeth to be to come. Wherefore, if from eternity he doth
  not only foreknow the deeds of men, but also their counsels and wills,
  there can be no free-will; for there is not any other deed or will, but
  those which the divine providence, that cannot be deceived, hath
  foreseen. For if things can be drawn aside to any other end than was
  foreknown, there will not be any firm knowledge of that which is to
  come, but rather an uncertain opinion, which in my opinion were impious
  to believe of God. Neither do I allow of that reason with which some
  suppose that they can dissolve the difficulty of this question. For they
  say that nothing is therefore to come to pass because Providence did
  foresee it, but rather contrariwise, because it shall be, it could not
  be unknown to Providence, and in this manner the necessity passes over
  to the other side. For it is not necessary, they argue, that those
  things should happen which are foreseen, but it is necessary that those
  things should be foreseen that are to come--as though our problem were
  this, which of them is the cause of a thing, the foreknowledge of the
  necessity of things to come, or the necessity of the foreknowledge of
  things to come, and we were not trying to prove that, howsoever these
  causes be ordered, the event of the things which are foreknown is
  necessary, even though the foreknowledge seemeth not to confer necessity
  of being upon the things themselves. For if any man sitteth the opinion
  which thinketh so must needs be true, and again on the other side, if
  the opinion that one sitteth be true, he must needs sit. Wherefore,
  there is necessity in both, in the one of sitting and in the other of
  truth. But one sitteth not because the opinion is true, but rather this
  is true because one hath taken his seat. So that though the cause of
  truth proceedeth from one part, yet there is a common necessity in both.

  And the like is to be inferred of Providence and future things. For even
  though they be foreseen because they shall be, yet they do not come to
  pass because they are foreseen, notwithstanding it is necessary that
  either things to come be foreseen by God, or that things foreseen do
  fall out, which alone is sufficient to overthrow free-will. But see how
  preposterous it is that the event of temporal things should be said to
  be the cause of the everlasting foreknowledge! And what else is it to
  think that God doth therefore foresee future things, because they are to
  happen, than to affirm that those things which happened long since, are
  the cause of that sovereign providence? Furthermore, as when I know
  anything to be, it must needs be; so when I know that anything shall be,
  it must needs be to come. And so it followeth that the event of a thing
  foreknown cannot be avoided. Finally, if any man thinketh otherwise than
  the thing is, that is not only no knowledge, but it is a deceitful
  opinion far from the truth of knowledge; wherefore, if anything is to be
  in such sort that the event of it is not certain or necessary, how can
  that be foreknown that it shall happen? For as knowledge is without
  mixture of falsity, so that which is conceived by it cannot be otherwise
  than it is conceived. For this is the cause why knowledge is without
  deceit, because everything must needs be so as the knowledge
  apprehendeth it to be. What then? How doth God foreknow that these
  uncertain things shall be? For if He judgeth that those things shall
  happen inevitably, which it is possible shall not happen, He is
  deceived, which is not only impious to think, but also to speak. But if
  He supposeth that they shall happen in such sort as they are, so that He
  knoweth that they may equally be done and not be done, what
  foreknowledge is this which comprehendeth no certain or stable thing? Or
  in what is this better than that ridiculous prophecy of Tiresias
  "Whatsoever I say shall either be or not be"[ ]? or in what shall the
  divine providence exceed human opinion, if, as men, God judgeth those
  things to be uncertain the event of which is doubtful? But if nothing
  can be uncertain to that most certain fountain of all things, the
  occurrence of those things is certain, which He doth certainly know
  shall be. Wherefore there is no freedom in human counsels and actions,
  which the divine mind, foreseeing all things without error or falsehood,
  tieth and bindeth to one event. Which once admitted, it is evident what
  ruin of human affairs will ensue. For in vain are rewards and
  punishments proposed to good and evil, which no free and voluntary
  motion of their minds hath deserved. And that will seem most unjust
  which is now judged most just, that either the wicked should be punished
  or the good rewarded, since their own will leadeth them to neither, but
  they are compelled by the certain necessity of that which is to come. By
  which means virtues and vices shall be nothing, but rather there will
  follow a mixed confusion of all deserts. And--than which there can be
  nothing invented more impious--since that all order of things proceedeth
  from Providence, and human counsels can do nothing, it followeth that
  our vices also shall be referred to the author of goodness. Wherefore
  there is no means left to hope or pray for anything, since an unflexible
  course connecteth all things that can be desired! Wherefore that only
  traffic betwixt God and men of hope and prayer shall be taken away: if
  indeed by the price of just humility we deserve the unestimable benefit
  of God's grace; for this is the only manner by which it seemeth that men
  may talk with God, and by the very manner of supplication be joined to
  that inaccessible light before they obtain anything; which if by the
  admitting the necessity of future things, they be thought to have no
  force, by what shall we be united and cleave to that Sovereign Prince of
  all things? Wherefore mankind must needs (as thou saidest in thy verse a
  little before), being separated and severed from its source, fail and
  fall away.


  [ ] Hor. _Sat._ ii.  .  .




III.

Quaenam discors foedera rerum
Causa resoluit? Quis tanta deus
Veris statuit bella duobus,
Vt quae carptim singula constent
Eadem nolint mixta iugari?                                                 
An nulla est discordia ueris
Semperque sibi certa cohaerent?
Sed mens caecis obruta membris
Nequit oppressi luminis igne
Rerum tenues noscere nexus.                                               
Sed cur tanto flagrat amore
Veri tectas reperire notas?
Scitne quod appetit anxia nosse?
Sed quis nota scire laborat?
At si nescit, quid caeca petit?                                           
Quis enim quidquam nescius optet
Aut quis ualeat nescita sequi?
Quoue inueniat, quisque[ ] repertam
Queat ignarus noscere formam?
An cum mentem cerneret altam,                                             
Pariter summam et singula norat?
Nunc membrorum condita nube
Non in totum est oblita sui
Summamque tenet singula perdens.
Igitur quisquis uera requirit,                                            
Neutro est habitu; nam neque nouit
Nec penitus tamen omnia nescit,
Sed quam retinens meminit summam
Consulit alte uisa retractans,
Vt seruatis queat oblitas                                                 
           Addere partes."


[ ] quisque _codex Bambergensis_ s. xi.: quis _codd. meliores._




  III.

  What cause of discord breaks the bands of love?
  What God between two truths such wars doth move?
  That things which severally well settled be
  Yet joined in one will never friendly prove?
  Or in true things can we no discord see,
  Because all certainties do still agree?
  But our dull soul, covered with members blind,
  Knows not the secret laws which things do bind,
  By the drowned light of her oppressed fire.
  Why then, the hidden notes of things to find,
  Doth she with such a love of truth desire?
  If she knows that which she doth so require,
  Why wisheth she known things to know again?
  If she knows not, why strives she with blind pain?
  Who after things unknown will strive to go?
  Or will such ignorant pursuit maintain?
  How shall she find them out? Or having so,
  How shall she then their forms and natures know?
  Because this soul the highest mind did view,
  Must we needs say that it all nature knew?
  Now she, though clouds of flesh do her debar,
  Forgets not all that was her ancient due,
  But in her mind some general motions are,
  Though not the skill of things particular.
  He that seeks truth in neither course doth fall;
  Not knowing all, nor ignorant of all,
  He marketh general things which he retains,
  And matters seen on high doth back recall,
  And things forgotten to his mind regains,
  And joins them to that part which there remains."




IV.

Tum illa: "Vetus," inquit, "haec est de prouidentia querela Marcoque
Tullio, cum diuinationem distribuit, uehementer agitata tibique ipsi res
diu prorsus multumque quaesita, sed haud quaquam ab ullo uestrum hactenus
satis diligenter ac firmiter expedita. Cuius caliginis causa est, quod
humanae ratiocinationis motus ad diuinae praescientiae simplicitatem non
potest admoueri, quae si ullo modo cogitari queat, nihil prorsus
relinquetur ambigui. Quod ita demum patefacere atque expedire temptabo, si
prius ea quibus moueris expendero. Quaero enim, cur illam soluentium
rationem minus efficacem putes, quae quia praescientiam non esse futuris
rebus causam necessitatis existimat, nihil impediri praescientia arbitrii
libertatem putat. Num enim tu aliunde argumentum futurorum necessitatis
trahis, nisi quod ea quae praesciuntur non euenire non possunt? Si igitur
praenotio nullam futuris rebus adicit necessitatem, quod tu etiam paulo
ante fatebare, quid est quod uoluntarii exitus rerum ad certum cogantur
euentum? Etenim positionis gratia, ut quid consequatur aduertas, statuamus
nullam esse praescientiam. Num igitur quantum ad hoc attinet, quae ex
arbitrio eueniunt ad necessitatem cogantur?" "Minime." "Statuamus iterum
esse, sed nihil rebus necessitatis iniungere; manebit ut opinor eadem
uoluntatis integra atque absoluta libertas.

Sed praescientia, inquies, tametsi futuris eueniendi necessitas non est,
signum tamen est necessario ea esse uentura. Hoc igitur modo, etiam si
praecognitio non fuisset, necessarios futurorum exitus esse constaret. Omne
etenim signum tantum quid sit ostendit, non uero efficit quod designat.
Quare demonstrandum prius est nihil non ex necessitate contingere, ut
praenotionem signum esse huius necessitatis appareat. Alioquin si haec
nulla est, ne illa quidem eius rei signum poterit esse quae non est. Iam
uero probationem firma ratione subnixam constat non ex signis neque petitis
extrinsecus argumentis sed ex conuenientibus necessariisque causis esse
ducendam. Sed qui fieri potest ut ea non proueniant quae futura esse
prouidentur? Quasi uero nos ea quae prouidentia futura esse praenoscit non
esse euentura credamus ac non illud potius arbitremur, licet eueniant,
nihil tamen ut euenirent sui natura necessitatis habuisse; quod hinc facile
perpendas licebit. Plura etenim dum fiunt subiecta oculis intuemur, ut ea
quae in quadrigis moderandis atque flectendis facere spectantur aurigae
atque ad hunc modum cetera. Num igitur quidquam illorum ita fieri
necessitas ulla compellit?" "Minime. Frustra enim esset artis effectus, si
omnia coacta mouerentur." "Quae igitur cum fiunt carent exsistendi
necessitate, eadem prius quam fiant sine necessitate futura sunt. Quare
sunt quaedam euentura quorum exitus ab omni necessitate sit absolutus. Nam
illud quidem nullum arbitror esse dicturum, quod quae nunc fiunt, prius
quam fierent, euentura non fuerint. Haec igitur etiam praecognita liberos
habent euentus. Nam sicut scientia praesentium rerum nihil his quae fiunt,
ita praescientia futurorum nihil his quae uentura sunt necessitatis
importat. Sed hoc, inquis, ipsum dubitatur, an earum rerum quae necessarios
exitus non habent ulla possit esse praenotio. Dissonare etenim uidentur
putasque si praeuideantur consequi necessitatem, si necessitas desit minime
praesciri nihilque scientia comprehendi posse nisi certum; quod si quae
incerti sunt exitus ea quasi certa prouidentur, opinionis id esse caliginem
non scientiae ueritatem. Aliter enim ac sese res habeat arbitrari ab
integritate scientiae credis esse diuersum. Cuius erroris causa est, quod
omnia quae quisque nouit ex ipsorum tantum ui atque natura cognosci
aestimat quae sciuntur; quod totum contra est Omne enim quod cognoscitur
non secundum sui uim sed secundum cognoscentium potius comprehenditur
facultatem. Nam ut hoc breui liqueat exemplo, eandem corporis rotunditatem
aliter uisus aliter tactus agnoscit. Ille eminus manens totum simul iactis
radiis intuetur; hic uero cohaerens orbi atque coniunctus circa ipsum motus
ambitum rotunditatem partibus comprehendit. Ipsum quoque hominem aliter
sensus, aliter imaginatio, aliter ratio, aliter intellegentia contuetur.
Sensus enim figuram in subiecta materia constitutam, imaginatio uero solam
sine materia iudicat figuram. Ratio uero hanc quoque transcendit speciemque
ipsam quae singularibus inest uniuersali consideratione perpendit.
Intellegentiae uero celsior oculus exsistit; supergressa namque
uniuersitatis ambitum ipsam illam simplicem formam pura mentis acie
contuetur.

In quo illud maxime considerandum est: nam superior comprehendendi uis
amplectitur inferiorem, inferior uero ad superiorem nullo modo consurgit.
Neque enim sensus aliquid extra materiam ualet uel uniuersales species
imaginatio contuetur uel ratio capit simplicem formam, sed intellegentia
quasi desuper spectans concepta forma quae subsunt etiam cuncta diiudicat,
sed eo modo quo formam ipsam, quae nulli alii nota esse poterat,
comprehendit. Nam et rationis uniuersum et imaginationis figuram et
materiale sensibile cognoscit nec ratione utens nec imaginatione nec
sensibus, sed illo uno ictu mentis formaliter, ut ita dicam, cuncta
prospiciens. Ratio quoque cum quid uniuersale respicit, nec imaginatione
nec sensibus utens imaginabilia uel sensibilia comprehendit. Haec est enim
quae conceptionis suae uniuersale ita definiuit: homo est animal bipes
rationale. Quae cum uniuersalis notio sit, tum imaginabilem sensibilemque
esse rem nullus ignorat, quod illa non imaginatione uel sensu sed in
rationali conceptione considerat. Imaginatio quoque tametsi ex sensibus
uisendi formandique figuras sumpsit exordium, sensu tamen absente
sensibilia quaeque conlustrat non sensibili sed imaginaria ratione
iudicandi. Videsne igitur ut in cognoscendo cuncta sua potius facultate
quam eorum quae cognoscuntur utantur? Neque id iniuria; nam cum omne
iudicium iudicantis actus exsistat, necesse est ut suam quisque operam non
ex aliena sed ex propria potestate perficiat.




  IV.

  "This," quoth she, "is an ancient complaint of providence, vehemently
  pursued by Marcus Tullius in his _Distribution of Divination_,[ ]
  and a thing which thou thyself hast made great and long search after.
  But hitherto none of you have used sufficient diligence and vigour in
  the explication thereof. The cause of which obscurity is for that the
  motion of human discourse cannot attain to the simplicity of the divine
  knowledge, which if by any means we could conceive, there would not
  remain any doubt at all; which I will endeavour to make manifest and
  plain when I have first explicated that which moveth thee. For I demand
  why thou thinkest their solution unsufficient, who think that free-will
  is not hindered by foreknowledge, because they suppose that
  foreknowledge is not the cause of any necessity in things to come. For
  fetchest thou any proof for the necessity of future things from any
  other principle, but only from this, that those things which are
  foreknown cannot choose but happen? Wherefore if foreknowledge imposeth
  no necessity upon future events, which thou didst grant not long before,
  why should voluntary actions be tied to any certain success? For
  example's sake, that thou mayest see what will follow, let us suppose
  that there were no providence or foresight at all. Would those things
  which proceed from free-will be compelled to any necessity by this
  means?" "No." "Again, let us grant it to be, but that it imposeth no
  necessity upon anything; no doubt the same freedom of will will remain
  whole and absolute.

  But thou wilt say, even though foreknowledge be not a necessity for
  things to happen, yet it is a sign that they shall necessarily come to
  pass. Wherefore now, even if there had been no foreknowledge, the events
  of future things would have been necessary. For all signs only show what
  is, but cause not that which they design. And consequently it must first
  be proved that all things fall out by necessity, that it may appear that
  foreknowledge is a sign of this necessity. For otherwise, if there be no
  necessity, neither can foreknowledge be the sign of that which is not.
  Besides it is manifest that every firm proof must be drawn from
  intrinsical and necessary causes and not from signs and other farfetched
  arguments. But how is it possible those things should not happen which
  are foreseen to be to come? As though we did believe that those things
  will not be which providence hath foreknown and do not rather judge that
  although they happen, yet by their own nature they had no necessity of
  being, which thou mayest easily gather hence. For we see many things
  with our eyes while they are in doing, as those things which the
  coachmen do while they drive and turn their coaches and in like manner
  other things. Now doth necessity compel any of these things to be done
  in this sort?" "No. For in vain should art labour if all things were
  moved by compulsion." "Wherefore, as these things are without necessity
  when they are in doing, so likewise they are to come without necessity
  before they be done. And consequently there are some things to come
  whose event is free from all necessity. For I suppose no man will say
  that those things which are done now were not to come before they were
  done. Wherefore these things even being foreseen come freely to effect.
  For as the knowledge of things present causeth no necessity in things
  which are in doing, so neither the foreknowledge in things to come. But
  thou wilt say: This is the question, whether there can be any
  foreknowledge of those things whose events are not necessary. For these
  things seem opposite, and thou thinkest that, if future things be
  foreseen, there followeth necessity, if there be no necessity, that they
  that are not foreknown, and that nothing can be perfectly known unless
  it be certain. But if uncertain events be foreseen as certain, it is
  manifest that this is the obscurity of opinion and not the truth of
  knowledge. For thou thinkest it to be far from the integrity of
  knowledge to judge otherwise than the thing is. The cause of which error
  is because thou thinkest that all that is known is known only by the
  force and nature of the things themselves, which is altogether
  otherwise. For all that is known is not comprehended according to the
  force which it hath in itself, but rather according to the faculty of
  them which know it. For to explicate it with a brief example: the sight
  and the feeling do diversely discern the same roundness of a die. The
  sight standing aloof beholdeth it altogether by his beams; but the
  feeling united and joined to the orb, being moved about the compass of
  it, comprehendeth the roundness by parts. Likewise sense, imagination,
  reason and understanding do diversely behold a man. For sense looketh
  upon his form as it is placed in matter or subject, the imagination
  discerneth it alone without matter, reason passeth beyond this also and
  considereth universally the species or kind which is in particulars. The
  eye of the understanding is higher yet. For surpassing the compass of
  the whole world it beholdeth with the clear eye of the mind that simple
  form in itself.

  In which that is chiefly to be considered, that the superior force of
  comprehending embraceth the inferior; but the inferior can by no means
  attain to the superior; for the sense hath no force out of matter,
  neither doth the imagination conceive universal species, nor is reason
  capable of the simple form, but the understanding, as it were looking
  downward, having conceived that form, discerneth of all things which are
  under it, but in that sort in which it apprehendeth that form which can
  be known by none of the other. For it knoweth the universality of
  reason, and the figure of imagination, and the materiality of sense,
  neither using reason, nor imagination, nor senses, but as it were
  formally beholding all things with that one twinkling of the mind.
  Likewise reason, when it considereth any universality, comprehendeth
  both imagination and sensible things without the use of either
  imagination or senses. For she defineth the universality of her conceit
  thus: Man is a reasonable, two-footed, living creature, which being an
  universal knowledge, no man is ignorant that it is an imaginable and
  sensible thing, which she considereth by a reasonable conceiving and not
  by imagination or sense. Imagination also, although it began by the
  senses of seeing and forming figures, yet when sense is absent it
  beholdeth sensible things, not after a sensible, but after an imaginary
  manner of knowledge. Seest thou now how all these in knowing do rather
  use their own force and faculty than the force of those things which are
  known? Nor undeservedly; for since all judgment is the act of him who
  judgeth, it is necessary that every one should perfect his operation by
  his own power and not by the force of any other.


  [ ] _De diuin_, ii.




IV.

Quondam porticus attulit
Obscuros nimium senes
Qui sensus et imagines
E corporibus extimis
Credant mentibus imprimi,                                                  
Vt quondam celeri stilo
Mos est aequore paginae,
Quae nullas habeat notas,
Pressas figere litteras.
Sed mens si propriis uigens                                               
Nihil motibus explicat,
Sed tantum patiens iacet
Notis subdita corporum
Cassasque in speculi uicem
Rerum reddit imagines,                                                    
Vnde haec sic animis uiget
Cernens omnia notio?
Quae uis singula perspicit
Aut quae cognita diuidit?
Quae diuisa recolligit                                                    
Alternumque legens iter
Nunc summis caput inserit,
Nunc decedit in infima,
Tum sese referens sibi
Veris falsa redarguit?                                                    
Haec est efficiens magis
Longe causa potentior
Quam quae materiae modo
Impressas patitur notas.
Praecedit tamen excitans                                                  
Ac uires animi mouens
Viuo in corpore passio.
Cum uel lux oculos ferit
Vel uox auribus instrepit,
Tum mentis uigor excitus                                                  
Quas intus species tenet
Ad motus similes uocans
Notis applicat exteris
Introrsumque reconditis
Formis miscet imagines.                                                   




  IV.

  Cloudy old prophets of the Porch[ ] once taught
  That sense and shape presented to the thought
    From outward objects their impression take,
  As when upon a paper smooth and plain
  On which as yet no marks of ink have lain
    We with a nimble pen do letters make.
  But if our minds to nothing can apply
  Their proper motions, but do patient lie
    Subject to forms which do from bodies flow,
  As a glass renders empty[ ] shapes of things,
  Who then can show from whence that motion springs
    By force of which the mind all things doth know?
  Or by what skill are several things espied?
  And being known what power doth them divide,
    And thus divided doth again unite,
  And with a various journey oft aspires
  To highest things, and oft again retires
    To basest, nothing being out of sight,
  And when she back unto herself doth move,
  Doth all the falsehoods by the truth reprove?
    This vigour needs must be an active cause,
  And with more powerful forces must be deckt,
  Than that which from those forms, that do reflect
    From outward matter, all her virtue draws.
  And yet in living bodies passion's might
  Doth go before, whose office is to incite,
    And the first motions in the mind to make.
  As when the light unto our eyes appears,
  Or some loud voice is sounded in our ears,
    Then doth the strength of the dull mind awake
  Those phantasies which she retains within;
  She stirreth up such notions to begin,
    Whose objects with their natures best agree,
  And thus applying them to outward things,
  She joins the external shapes which thence she brings
    With forms which in herself included be.


  [ ] The Porch, _i.e._ the Painted Porch ([Greek: stoa poikilae]) at
  Athens, the great hall adorned with frescoes of the battle of Marathon,
  which served as lecture-room to Zeno, the founder of the Stoic sect.

  [ ] Cf. Quin potius noscas rerum simulacra uagari
            Multa modis multis nulla ui cassaque sensu.

  "But rather you are to know that idols or things wander about many in
  number in many ways, of no force, powerless to excite sense."--Lucr. iv.
   ,   (trans. Munro).




V.

Quod si in corporibus sentiendis, quamuis afficiant instrumenta sensuum
forinsecus obiectae qualitates animique agentis uigorem passio corporis
antecedat quae in se actum mentis prouocet excitetque interim quiescentes
intrinsecus formas, si in sentiendis, inquam, corporibus animus non
passione insignitur, sed ex sua ui subiectam corpori iudicat passionem,
quanto magis ea quae cunctis corporum affectionibus absoluta sunt, in
discernendo non obiecta extrinsecus sequuntur, sed actum suae mentis
expediunt? Hac itaque ratione multiplices cognitiones diuersis ac
differentibus cessere substantiis. Sensus enim solus cunctis aliis
cognitionibus destitutus immobilibus animantibus cessit quales sunt conchae
maris quaeque alia saxis haerentia nutriuntur, imaginatio uero mobilibus
beluis quibus iam inesse fugiendi appetendiue aliquis uidetur affectus,
ratio uero humani tantum generis est sicut intellegentia sola diuini. Quo
fit ut ea notitia ceteris praestet quae suapte natura non modo proprium sed
ceterarum quoque notitiarum subiecta cognoscit. Quid igitur, si
ratiocinationi sensus imaginatioque refragentur, nihil esse illud
uniuersale dicentes quod sese intueri ratio putet? Quod enim sensibile uel
imaginabile est, id uniuersum esse non posse; aut igitur rationis uerum
esse iudicium nec quidquam esse sensibile, aut quoniam sibi notum sit plura
sensibus et imaginationi esse subiecta, inanem conceptionem esse rationis
quae quod sensibile sit ac singulare quasi quiddam uniuersale consideret.
Ad haec, si ratio contra respondeat se quidem et quod sensibile et quod
imaginabile sit in uniuersitatis ratione conspicere, illa uero ad
uniuersitatis cognitionem adspirare non posse, quoniam eorum notio
corporales figuras non possit excedere, de rerum uero cognitione firmiori
potius perfectiorique iudicio esse credendum, in huiusmodi igitur lite nos
quibus tam ratiocinandi quam imaginandi etiam sentiendique uis inest nonne
rationis potius causam probaremus? Simile est quod humana ratio diuinam
intellegentiam futura, nisi ut ipsa cognoscit, non putat intueri. Nam ita
disseris: Si qua certos ac necessarios habere non uideantur euentus, ea
certo euentura praesciri nequeunt. Harum igitur rerum nulla est
praescientia, quam si etiam in his esse credamus, nihil erit quod non ex
necessitate proueniat. Si igitur uti rationis participes sumus ita diuinae
iudicium mentis habere possemus, sicut imaginationem sensumque rationi
cedere oportere iudicauimus, sic diuinae sese menti humanam submittere
rationem iustissimum censeremus. Quare in illius summae intellegentiae
cacumen, si possumus, erigamur; illic enim ratio uidebit quod in se non
potest intueri, id autem est, quonam modo etiam quae certos exitus non
habent, certa tamen uideat ac definita praenotio neque id sit opinio sed
summae potius scientiae nullis terminis inclusa simplicitas.




  V.

  And if in sentient bodies, although the qualities of outward objects do
  move the organs of sense, and the passion of the body goeth before the
  vigour of the active mind, provoking her action to itself and exciting
  the inward forms which before lay quiet; if, I say, in perceiving these
  corporal objects the mind taketh not her impression from passion, but by
  her own force judgeth of the passion itself, which is objected to the
  body; how much more do those powers exercise the action of their mind
  and not only follow the outward objects in their judgment, which are
  free from all affections of the body? Wherefore in this sort have
  diverse and different substances knowledges of many kinds. For only
  sense destitute of all other means of knowledge is in those living
  creatures which are unmovable, as some shell-fish and other which stick
  to stones and so are nourished; and imagination in movable beasts who
  seem to have some power to covet and fly. But reason belongeth only to
  mankind, as understanding to things divine. So that that knowledge is
  most excellent which of itself doth not only know her own object, but
  also those which belong to others. What then, if sense and imagination
  repugn to discourse and reason, affirming that universality to be
  nothing which reason thinketh herself to see? For that cannot be
  universal, they argue, which is either sensible or imaginable; wherefore
  either the judgment of reason must be true and nothing at all sensible,
  or because they know that many things are subject to the senses and
  imagination, the conceit of reason is vain, which considereth that which
  is sensible and singular as if it were universal. Moreover if reason
  should answer that she beholdeth in her universality all that which is
  sensible or imaginable, but they cannot aspire to the knowledge of
  universality, because their knowledge cannot surpass corporal figures
  and shapes, and that we must give more credit to the firmer and more
  perfect judgment about the knowledge of things, in this contention
  should not we, who have the power of discoursing as well as of
  imagination and sense, rather take reason's part? The very like
  happeneth when human reason doth not think that the divine understanding
  doth behold future things otherwise than she herself doth. For thus thou
  arguest: If any things seem not to have certain and necessary events,
  they cannot be certainly foreknown to be to come. Wherefore there is no
  foreknowledge of these things, and if we think that there is any, there
  shall be nothing which happeneth not of necessity. If, therefore, as we
  are endued with reason, we could likewise have the judgment proper to
  the divine mind, as we have judged that imagination and sense must yield
  to reason, so likewise we would think it most reasonable and just that
  human reason should submit herself to the divine mind. Wherefore let us
  be lifted up as much as we can to that height of the highest mind; for
  there reason shall see that which she cannot behold in herself. And that
  is, how a certain and definite foreknowledge seeth even those things
  which have no certain issue, and that this is no opinion, but rather the
  simplicity of the highest knowledge enclosed within no bounds.




V.

Quam uariis terras animalia permeant figuris!
Namque alia extento sunt corpore pulueremque uerrunt
Continuumque trahunt ui pectoris incitata sulcum
Sunt quibus alarum leuitas uaga uerberetque uentos
Et liquido longi spatia aetheris enatet uolatu,                            
Haec pressisse solo uestigia gressibusque gaudent
Vel uirides campos transmittere uel subire siluas.
Quae uariis uideas licet omnia discrepare formis,
Prona tamen facies hebetes ualet ingrauare sensus.
Vnica gens hominum celsum leuat altius cacumen                            
Atque leuis recto stat corpore despicitque terras.
Haec nisi terrenus male desipis, admonet figura,
Qui recto caelum uultu petis exserisque frontem,
In sublime feras animum quoque, ne grauata pessum
Inferior sidat mens corpore celsius leuata.                               




  V.

  What several figures things that live upon the earth do keep!
  Some have their bodies stretched in length by which the dust they sweep
  And do continual furrows make while on their breasts they creep.
  Some lightly soaring up on high with wings the wind do smite
  And through the longest airy space pass with an easy flight.
  Some by their paces to imprint the ground with steps delight,
  Which through the pleasant fields do pass or to the woods do go,
  Whose several forms though to our eyes they do a difference show,
  Yet by their looks cast down on earth their senses heavy grow.
  Men only with more stately shape to higher objects rise,
  Who with erected bodies stand and do the earth despise.
  These figures warn (if baser thoughts blind not thine earthly eyes)
  That thou who with an upright face dost look upon the sky,
  Shouldst also raise thy mind aloft, lest while thou bearest high
  Thine earthly head, thy soul opprest beneath thy body lie.




VI.

Quoniam igitur, uti paulo ante monstratum est, omne quod scitur non ex sua
sed ex conprehendentium natura cognoscitur, intueamur nunc quantum fas est,
quis sit diuinae substantiae status, ut quaenam etiam scientia eius sit,
possimus agnoscere. Deum igitur aeternum esse cunctorum ratione degentium
commune iudicium est. Quid sit igitur aeternitas consideremus; haec enim
nobis naturam pariter diuinam scientiamque patefacit. Aeternitas igitur est
interminabilis uitae tota simul et perfecta possessio, quod ex collatione
temporalium clarius liquet. Nam quidquid uiuit in tempore id praesens a
praeteritis in futura procedit nihilque est in tempore constitutum quod
totum uitae suae spatium pariter possit amplecti. Sed crastinum quidem
nondum adprehendit; hesternum uero iam perdidit; in hodierna quoque uita
non amplius uiuitis quam in illo mobili transitorioque momento. Quod igitur
temporis patitur condicionem, licet illud, sicuti de mundo censuit
Aristoteles, nec coeperit umquam esse nec desinat uitaque eius cum temporis
infinitate tendatur, nondum tamen tale est ut aeternum esse iure credatur.
Non enim totum simul infinitae licet uitae spatium comprehendit atque
complectitur, sed futura nondum transacta iam non habet. Quod igitur
interminabilis uitae plenitudinem totam pariter comprehendit ac possidet,
cui neque futuri quidquam absit nec praeteriti fluxerit, id aeternum esse
iure perhibetur, idque necesse est et sui compos praesens sibi semper
adsistere et infinitatem mobilis temporis habere praesentem. Vnde non recte
quidam, qui cum audiunt uisum Platoni mundum hunc nec habuisse initium
temporis nec habiturum esse defectum, hoc modo conditori conditum mundum
fieri coaeternum putant. Aliud est enim per interminabilem duci uitam, quod
mundo Plato tribuit, aliud interminabilis uitae totam pariter complexum
esse praesentiam, quod diuinae mentis proprium esse manifestum est. Neque
deus conditis rebus antiquior uideri debet temporis quantitate sed
simplicis potius proprietate naturae. Hunc enim uitae immobilis
praesentarium statum infinitus ille temporalium rerum motus imitatur cumque
eum effingere atque aequare non possit, ex immobilitate deficit in motum,
ex simplicitate praesentiae decrescit in infinitam futuri ac praeteriti
quantitatem; et cum totam pariter uitae suae plenitudinem nequeat
possidere, hoc ipso quod aliquo modo numquam esse desinit; illud quod
implere atque exprimere non potest, aliquatenus uidetur aemulari alligans
se ad qualemcumque praesentiam huius exigui uolucrisque momenti, quae,
quoniam manentis illius praesentiae quandam gestat imaginem, quibuscumque
contigerit id praestat ut esse uideantur. Quoniam uero manere non potuit,
infinitum temporis iter arripuit eoque modo factum est ut continuaret eundo
uitam cuius plenitudinem complecti non ualuit permanendo. Itaque si digna
rebus nomina uelimus imponere, Platonem sequentes deum quidem aeternum,
mundum uero dicamus esse perpetuum. Quoniam igitur omne iudicium secundum
sui naturam quae sibi subiecta sunt comprehendit, est autem deo semper
aeternus ac praesentarius status; scientia quoque eius omnem temporis
supergressa motionem in suae manet simplicitate praesentiae infinitaque
praeteriti ac futuri spatia complectens omnia quasi iam gerantur in sua
simplici cognitione considerat. Itaque si praesentiam pensare uelis qua
cuncta dinoscit, non esse praescientiam quasi futuri sed scientiam numquam
deficientis instantiae rectius aestimabis; unde non praeuidentia sed
prouidentia potius dicitur, quod porro ab rebus infimis constituta quasi ab
excelso rerum cacumine cuncta prospiciat. Quid igitur postulas ut
necessaria fiant quae diuino lumine lustrentur, cum ne homines quidem
necessaria faciant esse quae uideant? Num enim quae praesentia cernis,
aliquam eis necessitatem tuus addit intuitus?" "Minime." "Atqui si est
diuini humanique praesentis digna collatio, uti uos uestro hoc temporario
praesenti quaedam uidetis, ita ille omnia suo cernit aeterno. Quare haec
diuina praenotio naturam rerum proprietatemque non mutat taliaque apud se
praesentia spectat qualia in tempore olim futura prouenient. Nec rerum
iudicia confundit unoque suae mentis intuitu tam necessarie quam non
necessarie uentura dinoscit; sicuti uos cum pariter ambulare in terra
hominem et oriri in caelo solem uidetis, quamquam simul utrumque conspectum
tamen discernitis et hoc uoluntarium illud esse necessarium iudicatis, ita
igitur cuncta despiciens diuinus intuitus qualitatem rerum minime perturbat
apud se quidem praesentium, ad condicionem uero temporis futurarum. Quo fit
ut hoc non sit opinio sed ueritate potius nixa cognitio, cum exstaturum
quid esse cognoscit quod idem exsistendi necessitate carere non nesciat.
Hic si dicas quod euenturum deus uidet id non euenire non posse, quod autem
non potest non euenire id ex necessitate contingere, meque ad hoc nomen
necessitatis adstringas; fatebor rem quidem solidissimae ueritatis sed cui
uix aliquis nisi diuini speculator accesserit. Respondebo namque idem
futurum, cum ad diuinam notionem refertur, necessarium, cum uero in sua
natura perpenditur, liberum prorsus atque absolutum uideri. Duae sunt
etenim necessitates, simplex una, ueluti quod necesse est omnes homines
esse mortales, altera condicionis, ut si aliquem ambulare scias, eum
ambulare necesse est; quod enim quisque nouit, id esse aliter ac notum est
nequit, sed haec condicio minime secum illam simplicem trahit. Hanc enim
necessitatem non propria facit natura sed condicionis adiectio; nulla enim
necessitas cogit incedere uoluntate gradientem, quamuis eum tum cum
graditur incedere necessarium sit. Eodem igitur modo, si quid prouidentia
praesens uidet, id esse necesse est, tametsi nullam naturae habeat
necessitatem. Atqui deus ea futura quae ex arbitrii libertate proueniunt
praesentia contuetur. Haec igitur ad intuitum relata diuinum necessaria
fiant per condicionem diuinae notionis; per se uero considerata ab absoluta
naturae suae libertate non desinunt. Fient igitur procul dubio cuncta quae
futura deus esse praenoscit, sed eorum quaedam de libero proficiscuntur
arbitrio; quae quamuis eueniant, exsistendo tamen naturam propriam non
amittunt, qua priusquam fierent etiam non euenire potuissent. Quid igitur
refert non esse necessaria, cum propter diuinae scientiae condicionem modis
omnibus necessitatis instar eueniet? Hoc scilicet quod ea quae paulo ante
proposui, sol oriens et gradiens homo. Quae dum fiunt, non fieri non
possunt; eorum tamen unum prius quoque quam fieret, necesse erat exsistere,
alterum uero minime. Ita etiam quae praesentia deus habet, dubio procul
exsistent, sed eorum hoc quidem de rerum necessitate descendit, illud uero
de potestate facientium. Haud igitur iniuria diximus haec si ad diuinam
notitiam referantur necessaria, si per se considerentur necessitatis esse
nexibus absoluta; sicuti omne quod sensibus patet, si ad rationem referas,
uniuersale est, si ad se ipsa respicias, singulare. 'Sed si in mea,'
inquies, 'potestate situm est mutare propositum, euacuabo prouidentiam, cum
quae illa praenoscit forte mutauero.' Respondebo: propositum te quidem tuum
posse deflectere, sed quoniam et id te posse et an facias quoue conuertas
praesens prouidentiae ueritas intuetur, diuinam te praescientiam non posse
uitare, sicuti praesentis oculi effugere non possis intuitum, quamuis te in
uarias actiones libera uoluntate conuerteris. Quid igitur inquies? Ex meane
dispositione scientia diuina mutabitur, ut cum ego nunc hoc nunc aliud
uelim, illa quoque noscendi uices alternare uideatur? Minime. Omne namque
futurum diuinus praecurrit intuitus et ad praesentiam propriae cognitionis
retorquet ac reuocat nec alternat, ut aestimas, nunc hoc nunc illud
praenoscendi uice, sed uno ictu mutationes tuas manens praeuenit atque
complectitur. Quam comprehendendi omnia uisendique praesentiam non ex
futurarum prouentu rerum, sed ex propria deus simplicitate sortitus est. Ex
quo illud quoque resoluitur quod paulo ante posuisti indignum esse, si
scientiae dei causam futura nostra praestare dicantur. Haec enim scientiae
uis praesentaria notione cuncta complectens rebus modum omnibus ipsa
constituit, nihil uero posterioribus debet. Quae cum ita sint, manet
intemerata mortalibus arbitrii libertas nec iniquae leges solutis omni
necessitate uoluntatibus praemia poenasque proponunt. Manet etiam spectator
desuper cunctorum praescius deus uisionisque eius praesens semper
aeternitas cum nostrorum actuum futura qualitate concurrit bonis praemia
malis supplicia dispensans. Nec frustra sunt in deo positae spes precesque;
quae cum rectae sunt, inefficaces esse non possunt. Auersamini igitur
uitia, colite uirtutes, ad rectas spes animum subleuate, humiles preces in
excelsa porrigite. Magna uobis est, si dissimulare non uultis, necessitas
indicta probitatis, cum ante oculos agitis iudicis cuncta cernentis."




  VI.

  Seeing, therefore, as hath been showed, all that is known is not
  comprehended by its own nature but by the power of him which
  comprehendeth it, let us see now, as much as we may, what is the state
  of the divine substance that we may also know what His knowledge is.
  Wherefore it is the common judgment of all that live by reason that God
  is everlasting, and therefore let us consider what eternity is. For this
  declareth unto us both the divine nature and knowledge. Eternity
  therefore is a perfect possession altogether of an endless life, which
  is more manifest by the comparison of temporal things, for whatsoever
  liveth in time, that being present proceedeth from times past to times
  to come, and there is nothing placed in time which can embrace all the
  space of its life at once. But it hath not yet attained to-morrow and
  hath lost yesterday. And you live no more in this day's life than in
  that movable and transitory moment. Wherefore, whatsoever suffereth the
  condition of time, although, as Aristotle thought of the world, it never
  began nor were ever to end, and its life did endure with infinite time,
  yet it is not such that it ought to be called everlasting. For it doth
  not comprehend and embrace all the space of its life together, though
  that life be infinite, but it hath not the future time which is yet to
  come. That then which comprehendeth and possesseth the whole fulness of
  an endless life together, to which neither any part to come is absent,
  nor of that which is past hath escaped, is worthy to be accounted
  everlasting, and this is necessary, that being no possession in itself,
  it may always be present to itself, and have an infinity of movable time
  present to it. Wherefore they are deceived who, hearing that Plato
  thought that this world had neither beginning of time nor should ever
  have any end, think that by this means the created world should be
  coeternal with the Creator. For it is one thing to be carried through an
  endless life, which Plato attributed to the world, another thing to
  embrace the whole presence of an endless life together, which is
  manifestly proper to the divine mind. Neither ought God to seem more
  ancient than the things created, by the quantity of time, but rather by
  the simplicity of His divine nature. For that infinite motion of
  temporal things imitateth the present state of the unmovable life, and
  since it cannot express nor equal it, it falleth from immobility to
  motion, and from the simplicity of presence, it decreaseth to an
  infinite quantity of future and past, and since it cannot possess
  together all the fulness of its life, by never leaving to be in some
  sort, it seemeth to emulate in part that which it cannot fully obtain
  and express, tying itself to this small presence of this short and swift
  moment, which because it carrieth a certain image of that abiding
  presence, whosoever hath it, seemeth to be. But because it could not
  stay it undertook an infinite journey of time, and so it came to pass
  that it continued that life by going whose plenitude it could not
  comprehend by staying. Wherefore, if we will give things their right
  names, following Plato, let us say that God is everlasting and the world
  perpetual. Wherefore, since every judgment comprehendeth those things
  which are subject unto it, according to its own nature, and God hath
  always an everlasting and present state, His knowledge also surpassing
  all motions of time, remaineth in the simplicity of His presence, and
  comprehending the infinite spaces of that which is past and to come,
  considereth all things in His simple knowledge as though they were now
  in doing. So that, if thou wilt weigh His foreknowledge with which He
  discerneth all things, thou wilt more rightly esteem it to be the
  knowledge of a never fading instant than a foreknowledge as of a thing
  to come. For which cause it is not called praevidence or foresight, but
  rather providence, because, placed far from inferior things, it
  overlooketh all things, as it were, from the highest top of things. Why,
  therefore, wilt thou have those things necessary which are illustrated
  by the divine light, since that not even men make not those things
  necessary which they see? For doth thy sight impose any necessity upon
  those things which thou seest present?" "No." "But the present instant
  of men may well be compared to that of God in this: that as you see some
  things in your temporal instant, so He beholdeth all things in His
  eternal present. Wherefore this divine foreknowledge doth not change the
  nature and propriety of things, and it beholdeth them such in His
  presence as they will after come to be, neither doth He confound the
  judgment of things, and with one sight of His mind He discerneth as well
  those things which shall happen necessarily as otherwise. As you, when
  at one time you see a man walking upon the earth and the sun rising in
  heaven, although they be both seen at once, yet you discern and judge
  that the one is voluntary, and the other necessary, so likewise the
  divine sight beholding all things disturbeth not the quality of things
  which to Him are present, but in respect of time are yet to come. And so
  this is not an opinion but rather a knowledge grounded upon truth, when
  He knoweth that such a thing shall be, which likewise He is not ignorant
  that it hath no necessity of being. Here if thou sayest that cannot
  choose but happen which God seeth shall happen, and that which cannot
  choose but happen, must be of necessity, and so tiest me to this name of
  necessity, I will grant that it is a most solid truth, but whereof
  scarce any but a contemplator of divinity is capable. For I will answer
  that the same thing is necessary when it is referred to the Divine
  knowledge; but when it is weighed in its own nature that it seemeth
  altogether free and absolute. For there be two necessities: the one
  simple, as that it is necessary for all men to be mortal; the other
  conditional, as if thou knowest that any man walketh, he must needs
  walk. For what a man knoweth cannot be otherwise than it is known. But
  this conditional draweth not with it that simple or absolute necessity.
  For this is not caused by the nature of the thing, but by the adding a
  condition. For no necessity maketh him to go that goeth of his own
  accord, although it be necessary that he goeth while he goeth. In like
  manner, if providence seeth anything present, that must needs be,
  although it hath no necessity of nature. But God beholdeth those future
  things, which proceed from free-will, present. These things, therefore,
  being referred to the divine sight are necessary by the condition of the
  divine knowledge, and, considered by themselves, they lose not absolute
  freedom of their own nature. Wherefore doubtless all those things come
  to pass which God foreknoweth shall come, but some of them proceed from
  free-will, which though they come to pass, yet do not, by coining into
  being, lose, since before they came to pass, they might also not have
  happened. But what importeth it that they are not necessary, since that
  by reason of the condition of the divine knowledge they come to pass in
  all respects as if they were necessary? It hath the same import as those
  things which I proposed a little before--the sun rising and the man
  going. While they are in doing, they cannot choose but be in doing; yet
  one of them was necessarily to be before it was, and the other not.
  Likewise those things which God hath present, will have doubtless a
  being, but some of them proceed from the necessity of things, other from
  the power of the doers. And therefore we said not without cause that
  these, if they be referred to God's knowledge, are necessary; and if
  they be considered by themselves, they are free from the bonds of
  necessity. As whatsoever is manifest to senses, if thou referrest it to
  reason, is universal; if thou considerest the things themselves, it is
  singular or particular. But thou wilt say, 'If it is in my power to
  change my purpose, shall I frustrate providence if I chance to alter
  those things which she foreknoweth?' I answer that thou mayest indeed
  change thy purpose, but because the truth of providence, being present,
  seeth that thou canst do so, and whether thou wilt do so or no, and what
  thou purposest anew, thou canst not avoid the divine foreknowledge, even
  as thou canst not avoid the sight of an eye which is present, although
  thou turnest thyself to divers actions by thy free-will.

  But yet thou wilt inquire whether God's knowledge shall be changed by
  thy disposition, so that when thou wilt now one thing, and now another,
  it should also seem to have divers knowledges. No. For God's sight
  preventeth all that is to come and recalleth and draweth it to the
  presence of His own knowledge; neither doth He vary, as thou imaginest,
  now knowing one thing and now another, but in one instant without moving
  preventeth and comprehendeth thy mutations. Which presence of
  comprehending and seeing all things, God hath not by the event of future
  things but by His own simplicity. By which that doubt is also resolved
  which thou didst put a little before, that it is an unworthy thing that
  our future actions should be said to cause the knowledge of God. For
  this force of the divine knowledge comprehending all things with a
  present notion appointeth to everything its measure and receiveth
  nothing from ensuing accidents. All which being so, the free-will of
  mortal men remaineth unviolated, neither are the laws unjust which
  propose punishments and rewards to our wills, which are free from all
  necessity. There remaineth also a beholder of all things which is God,
  who foreseeth all things, and the eternity of His vision, which is
  always present, concurreth with the future quality of our actions,
  distributing rewards to the good and punishments to the evil. Neither do
  we in vain put our hope in God or pray to Him; for if we do this well
  and as we ought, we shall not lose our labour or be without effect.
  Wherefore fly vices, embrace virtues, possess your minds with worthy
  hopes, offer up humble prayers to your highest Prince. There is, if you
  will not dissemble, a great necessity of doing well imposed upon you,
  since you live in the sight of your Judge, who beholdeth all things."


--------------------

THE PROBLEM OF LIFE


Before we proceed to outline Eucken's philosophical position, it will be
well if we can first be clear as to the special problem with which he
concerns himself. Philosophers have at some time or other considered all
the problems of heaven and earth to be within their province, especially
the difficult problems for which a simple solution is impossible. Hence
it is, perhaps, that philosophy has been in disrepute, especially in
English-speaking countries, the study of the subject has been very
largely limited to a small class of students, and the philosopher has
been regarded as a dreamy, theorising, and unpractical individual.

Many people, when they hear of Eucken, will put him out of mind as an
ordinary member of a body of cranks. From Eucken's point of view this is
the most unfortunate thing that can happen, for his message is not
directed to a limited number of advanced students of philosophy, but is
meant for all thinking members of the human race.

The problem he endeavours to solve is far from being one of mere
theoretical interest; on the contrary it has to do with matters of
immediate practical concern to the life of the individual and of the
community. To ignore him will be to fail to take account of one of the
most rousing philosophies of modern times.

The apathy that exists in regard to the subject of philosophy is not
easy to explain. It is not that philosophising is only possible to the
greatest intellects; it is indeed natural for the normal mind to do so.
In a quiet hour, when the world with its rush and din leaves us to
ourselves and the universe, we begin to ask ourselves "Why" and "How,"
and then almost unconsciously we philosophise. Nothing is more natural
to the human mind than to wonder, and to wonder is to begin to
philosophise.

Perhaps philosophers have been largely to blame for the indifference
shown; their terms have often been needlessly difficult, their language
obscure, and their ideas abstruse. Too often, too, their abstract
speculations have caused them to ignore or forget the actual experience
of mankind.

Those who have quarrelled with philosophy for these or other reasons
will do well to lay their prejudices aside when they start a study of
Eucken, for though he has some of the faults of his class, he has many
striking and exceptional excellences.

Philosophers in general set out to solve the riddle of the universe.
They differ in their statement of the problem, in the purpose of the
attempt, and in their methods of attempting the solution. Some will
wonder how this marvellous universe ever came into existence, and will
consider the question of the existence of things to be the problem of
philosophy. Others in observing the diversity of things in the universe
wonder what is behind it all; they seek to go beyond mere appearances,
and to investigate the nature of that behind the appearances, which they
call the reality. In their attempts to solve one or both of these
problems, thinkers are led to marvel how it is that we get to know
things at all; they are tempted to investigate the possibility of
knowledge, and are in this way side-tracked from the main problem.
Others in their investigations are struck with amazement at the
intricate organisation of the human mind; they leave the riddle of the
universe to study the processes of human thought, and examine as far as
they are able the phenomena of consciousness. Then thought itself claims
the attention of other philosophers; they seek to find what are the laws
of valid thought, what rules must be followed in order that through
reasoning we may arrive at correct conclusions. Others become attracted
to an investigation of the good in the universe, and their question
changes from "What is?" to "What ought to be?" Others interest
themselves in the problem of the beautiful, and endeavour to determine
the essence of the beautiful and of its appreciation. In this way the
subject of philosophy separates out into a number of branches. The study
of the beautiful is called Æsthetics; of the good, Ethics; of the laws
of thought, Logic; of the mind processes, Psychology; of the possibility
of knowledge, the Theory of knowledge; while the deeper problems of the
existence of things, of reality and unity in the universe, are generally
included under Metaphysics.

It need hardly be pointed out that all these branches are very closely
related, and that a discussion of any one of them involves to some
extent a reference to the others. One cannot, for example, attempt to
solve the great question of reality without touching upon the
possibility of knowledge, without some reference to the processes of the
human mind, and the standards of the validity of thought, of the good,
and of the beautiful.

It is however essential, if one is to appreciate a philosopher, to
understand clearly what his main problem is. Therein lies frequently the
differences among philosophers--that is, in the special emphasis laid on
one problem, and the attention to, or neglect of other aspects. To fail
to be clear on this matter frequently means to misunderstand a
philosopher.

And it would seem that many critics have failed to appreciate the work
of Eucken to the extent they should, because they have expected him to
deal in detail with problems which it is not his intention to discuss,
and have failed to appreciate what special problem it is that he
attempts to solve.

Eucken's special problem is that of the reality in the universe, of the
unity there exists in the diversity of things. In so far as he makes
this his problem, he is at one with other philosophers in investigating
what may perhaps be considered to be the most profound problem that the
human mind has ever conceived. The fact that distinguishes Eucken from a
large number of other thinkers is that he starts where they leave off.
At a rule, philosophers begin their investigation with a consideration
of matter, and proceed by slow degrees to attempt to explain the reality
at the basis of it. Some never get further, and dispense with the
question of human life and thought as mere aspects or manifestations of
the material world. But the problem of life is for Eucken the one
problem--he seeks to find the reality beneath the superficialities of
human existence, and he has little to say concerning the world of
matter. And, after all, it is the problem of life that urgently calls
for solution, for upon the solution that is accepted, the life of the
individual is to a large extent based. It is, of course, very
interesting to meditate and speculate upon the material world, its
origin and evolution, but the question is very largely one of mere
theoretical interest--a kind of game or puzzle for studious minds. It is
the question of life itself that is ultimately of practical interest to
every human soul. And this is the problem that Eucken would solve. Hence
those who expect to find a closely reasoned philosophy on matter and its
manifestations must look elsewhere, for Eucken has little for them.
Eucken's philosophy is a philosophy of life, and he only touches
incidentally those aspects of philosophy that are not immediately
concerned with his special problem. He refuses to be allured from the
main problem by subsidiary investigations, and perhaps rightly so, for
one problem of such magnitude would seem to be enough for one human mind
to attempt. Eucken is a philosopher who lays foundations and deals with
broad outlines and principles; it must be left to his many disciples to
fill in any gaps that exist on this account, by attempting to solve the
subsidiary problems with which Eucken cannot for the present concern
himself.

If Eucken's problem differs fundamentally from that of most other
philosophers, perhaps the purpose of his investigations is still a more
striking characteristic. He is anxious to solve the riddle of the
universe in order that there may be drawn from the solution an
inspiration which shall help the human race to concentrate its energies
upon the highest ideals of life. The desire to find a meaning which will
explain, and at the same time infuse zest and gladness into every
department of life has become a passion with him, and in finding that
meaning, his great endeavour is to prove the truth of human freedom and
personality. He wishes to solve the riddle in order that man may become
a better man, the world a better world. His aim is definitely an
ethical aim, and his purpose a practical one of the noblest order, and
not one of mere intellectual interest.

There is much, too, that is original in his methods--this will become
evident in the chapters that follow. He begins with an inquiry into the
solutions that have been offered. After careful investigation he finds
they all fail to satisfy the conditions which a solution should satisfy.
His discussions of these theories are most illuminating, and those who
do not agree with his conclusions cannot fail to admire his masterly
treatment.

Having arrived at this conclusion, he searches the story of the past,
studies the conditions of the present, and gazes into the maze of the
future, and finds revealed in them all an eternal something, unaffected
by time, which was, is, and ever shall be--the eternal, universal,
spiritual his, which then must be the great reality.

Upon this basis he builds a system of philosophy, which he considers to
be more satisfactory than the solutions already offered; with which
contention, there is little doubt, the majority of his readers will be
inclined to agree.

After the brief statement of Eucken's special problem, of the purpose
and methods of his investigation, we can proceed to outline his theories
in greater detail, beginning in the next chapter with his discussion of
the solutions that have in the past been offered and accepted.




CHAPTER II

HAS THE PROBLEM BEEN SOLVED?


What is the meaning, the value, and purpose of life, and what is the
highest and the eternal in life--the great reality? This is the question
that Eucken would solve. Before attempting a solution of his own, he
examines those that have already been offered. His discussion of these
theories is remarkable for the fairness, breadth of view, sympathy,
insight, and accurate knowledge that is shown. There is no superficial
criticism, neither does he concern himself with the inessential details
of the theories.

Jest-books tell us of a defendant against whom a claim for compensation
was made by a complainant who alleged that the former's dog had bitten
him. The defence was, first, that the dog was lame, blind, and
toothless; second, that it had died a week before; and third, that the
defendant never possessed a dog. A sensible judge would wish to be
satisfied in regard to the third statement before wasting time
discussing the others; if it proved to be true, then the case would be
at an end. The defences of philosophical systems are often similar, and
the critic is tempted to waste time discussing details when he should go
to the root of the matter. Eucken does not fall into this error. His
special method is to seek the idea or ideas which lie at the root of the
proposed solution; if these are unsatisfactory, then he does not
consider it necessary to discuss them further. Hence his work is free
from the flippant and superficial argument so common to-day; he makes a
fair and serious endeavour to find out the truth (if any) that is at the
basis of the proposed solutions, and does not hesitate to give them
their due meed of praise even though he considers them to be ultimately
unsatisfactory.

Before a solution can be regarded as a satisfactory one, Eucken holds
that it should satisfy certain conditions. It should offer an
explanation for life which can be a firm basis for life, it must admit
of the possibility of human freedom, and must release the human being
from sordid motives--unless it satisfy these conditions, then it cannot
be accepted as final.

The solutions of the problem of life that have been offered he considers
to be five--Religion and Immanental Idealism, Naturalism, Socialism and
Individualism, the first two regarding the invisible world as the
reality in life, the others laying emphasis on man's life in the present
world. The reader will perhaps wonder how his choice has fallen upon
these systems of thought and these alone. The explanation is a simple
one: he considers it necessary to deal only with those theories which
can form, and have formed, bases for a whole system of life. Mere
theoretical ideas of life, especially negative ideas such as those of
agnosticism and scepticism, do not form such a basis, but the five
chosen for discussion can, and have to some extent, posed as complete
theories of life, upon which a system of life can be built.

Has _Religion_ solved the question? If it has, then it must have done so
in that which must be considered its highest form--in Christianity.
Christianity has attempted the solution by placing stress upon a higher
invisible world, a world in sharp contrast with the mere world of sense,
and far superior to it. It unites life to a supernatural world, and
raises mankind above the level of the natural world. It has brought out
with great clearness the contrast between the higher world and the world
of sin, and has shown the need for a break with the evil in the world.
It has given to man a belief in freedom, and in the necessity for a
complete change of heart. It has proved a source of deliverance from the
feeling, of guilt, and a comfort in suffering. Indeed, considering all
the facts, there seems to be no doubt that, of all the solutions
offered, religion has been the most powerful factor in the history of
mankind.

Its influence would continue for the present and future, were it not
that doubt has been cast upon its very foundations, and had not
circumstances arisen to take men's minds away from thoughts of a higher
and invisible world, and to concentrate them to a greater extent than
formerly upon the world of sense. The progress of the natural sciences
has done much to bring about the change. Christianity made man the
centre of the universe, for whom all things existed, but the sciences
have insisted upon a broader view of the universe, and have deposed man
from his throne, and given him a much humbler position. Then as the
conception of law became more prominent, and scientists became more and
more inclined to explain all things as the result of natural laws, the
idea of a personal God in constant communion with, and supervision over
mankind, fell into disfavour.

And the study of history has caused questions to be raised. Some
historians have endeavoured to show that the idea of an overworld is
merely the characteristic of a certain stage in the evolution of
mankind, and that the ideas of religion are, after all, little more than
the mental construction of a God upon the image of man's own self.
History has attacked the doctrinal form of religion, and has endeavoured
to show that religions have been very largely coloured and influenced by
the prevailing ideas of the time; and the question naturally arises as
to whether there is anything more in religion than these temporary
elements.

And this is not all. In the present age the current of human activity is
strong. Man is beginning to accomplish things in the material world, and
is becoming anxious to accomplish more. His railways cover the lands,
his ships sail the seas, and his aeroplanes fly through the air. He has
acquired a taste for this world, a zest for the conquest and the
utilising for his own pleasure and benefit of the world of nature. And
when this occurs, the overworld sinks into the background--he is
satisfied with the present, and feels no need, except under special
circumstances, of a higher world. The sense world at present makes a
strong appeal--and the stronger it becomes, the less he listens to the
call of an overworld.

The sciences, history, and the special phases of human activity have
drawn attention from a higher, invisible world, and have cast doubts
upon its very existence.

As a result of this, "Religion (in the traditional form), despite all it
has effected, is for the man of to-day a question rather than an answer.
It is itself too much of a problem to interpret to us the meaning of our
life, and make us feel that it is worth the living."

In these words Eucken states his conviction that Christianity in its
orthodox forms cannot solve the problem of the present. This, however,
is not all he has to say concerning religion. He is, in truth, a great
believer in religion, and as will be seen, he believes that later it
will again step forth in a changed form as "the fact of facts" to wield
a power perhaps greater than ever before.

As in the case of religion, _Immanent Idealism_ is a theory that gives
life an invisible basis, but the invisible has been regarded as that
which lies at the root of the present world, and not as a separate
higher world outside our own. The Divine it considers not as a personal
being apart from the world, but as a power existing in and permeating
it, that indeed which gives to the world its truth and depth. Man
belongs to the visible world, but inwardly he is alive to the presence
of a deeper reality, and his ambition must be to become himself a part
of this deeper whole. If by turning from his superficial life he can set
himself in the depths of reality, then a magnificent life, with the
widest prospects, opens out before him. "He may win the whole of
infinity for his own, and set himself free from the triviality of the
merely human without losing himself in an alien world." And if he does
so, he is led to place greater emphasis upon the high ideals of life
than upon material progress. He learns to value the beautiful far above
the merely useful; the inner life above mere existence, a genuine
spiritual culture above the mere perfecting of natural and social
conditions. There is brought into view a new and deeper life in which
the emphasis is placed upon the good, the beautiful, and the true. In
this way idealism has inspired many men to put forth their energies for
the highest aims, has lifted the individual above the narrowness of a
life devoted to himself alone, and has produced characters of
exceptional beauty and strength. It claims, indeed, to be able to shape
the world of man more satisfactorily than religion can, for it has no
need for doctrines of the Divine, the Divine being immediately present
in the world. But despite its great influence in the past, its power
has of late been considerably weakened.

The question of the existence of a deeper invisible reality in the world
has become as problematic as the doctrines of religion.

To be a whole-hearted believer in the older forms of idealism it is
necessary that the universe be regarded as ultimately reasonable and
harmonious, and there must be a belief in the possibilities of great
development on the part of the human being. But a serious study of
things reveals to us the fact that the universe is not entirely
reasonable and harmonious. If it were, then man's effort towards the
ideal would be helped by the whole universe, but that is far from being
the case; progress means fight, and difficult fight; there is definite
opposition to the efforts of man to raise himself. Moreover, there is
evil in the world, let pantheists and others say what they will. Eucken
refuses to close his eyes to, or to explain away, opposition, pain, and
evil--the world is far from being wholly reasonable and harmonious, and
idealists must acknowledge this fact. The natural sciences, too, by
emphasising the reign of law, tend to limit more and more the
possibilities of the human being, ultimately robbing him of all
freedom--hence of all possibility of creation. And how can one be an
enthusiastic devotee of idealism if he is led to doubt man's power to
aim at, fight towards, or even choose the highest?

Idealism was at its height in those red-letter days when a high state of
culture had been attained, and great personalities produced masterpieces
in art, music, and literature. The progress of the sciences and of man's
natural activity has directed the spirit of the age towards material
progress; the ideals of mankind tend to become external and
superficial, and the interest in the invisible world falls to a minimum.

To some extent, too, idealism breathes of aristocracy--a most unpopular
characteristic in a democratic age. Experience shows that man is raised
above himself only in rare cases, and that the great things in the
realms of art, music, and literature are very largely the monopoly of
the few, and these mainly of the leisured classes. Hence the appeal of
idealism to certain types of men and women must necessarily be a feeble
one.

Then, again, there is the general indifference of mankind to lofty aims;
this militates against the power of idealism even more than in the case
of religion, for while in the latter there is the idea of a personal God
who is pleased or displeased urging men to renewed effort, the teachings
of idealism may appear to be mere abstractions, and can, as such,
possess little driving-power for the ordinary mind.

Idealism, too, seems to be a mere compromise between religion and a life
devoted to sense experience, and like most compromises it lacks the
enthusing power of the original ideas.

Finally, the whole theory leaves us in uncertainty--"that which was
intended to give a firm support, and to point out a clear course to our
life, has itself become a difficult problem."

But Eucken has more to say concerning idealism, even though in a
different form from the theories of the past. Indeed, his philosophy is
generally classed amongst the idealisms. Eucken makes a great endeavour,
however, to avoid the difficulties and objections to the idealistic
position; later we shall see that a great measure of success has crowned
his efforts.

Having discussed the two solutions that place special stress on the
invisible world, he proceeds to deal with the theories which emphasise
the relation of the life of man to the material world.

He first treats of _Naturalism_, that solution of the problem that makes
the sense experience of surrounding nature the basis of life,
subordinating even the life of the soul to the level of the natural,
material world.

Nature in the early ages had been superficially explained, often in the
light of religious doctrine. Man gave to nature a variety of
explanations and of colouring, depending largely upon his ideas of the
place of nature in relation to himself and to the invisible world. But
such anthropomorphic explanations could not long survive the progress of
the sciences, for a scientific comprehension of nature could only be
attained by getting rid of all human colouring, and by investigating
nature entirely by itself, out of all relation to the human soul. Man
then investigated nature more and more as an object apart from himself.

The first result of these investigations was to impress upon him the
reality of nature as something independent, and to increase on a very
large scale his knowledge of, and control over nature. When man began to
formulate and understand nature, he began, too, to invent machines to
profit from the knowledge he gained. Hence followed a marvellously
fruitful period of human activity, an activity which at first
strengthened man in his own soul, and gave him increased consciousness
of independence and power. While he was compelled to admit the greatness
of the natural world, he became more and more convinced that he himself
was far greater, for could he not put the laws of nature to his own use
and profit? Hence the gain to man at this stage of the development of
the sciences was very great, for he had come to appreciate more than
before the superiority of the human soul over the material world. Hence
resulted a more robust type of life, "a life energetic, masculine,
pressing forward unceasingly." Matters, however, were not destined to
remain long at this stage. As man's knowledge of the processes of nature
increased further, a twofold result followed. On the one hand, the sense
world of nature became increasingly absorbing in interest; on the other
hand, laws were formulated and nature was conceived of as being a chain
of cause and effect, a combination of mechanical elements whose
interactions were according to law, and could be foretold with the
utmost precision.

These two factors worked in the same direction, namely, that of
rendering less necessary the conception of a spiritual world. The
interest of mankind became so concentrated upon material things that the
interest in the invisible decreased, while the mechanical, soulless
elements with their ceaseless actions and reactions in definite order,
and according to inviolable law, were held sufficient to account for the
phenomena of nature. The keynote was "relation to environment"; a
constantly changing environment, changing according to law, called for
ceaseless readjustment, and the adaptation to environment was held to be
the stimulus to all activity in the natural world.

The later development of biology, and the doctrine of the evolution of
species, gradually extended this conception of nature to include man
himself.

What he had regarded as his distinctive characteristics were held to be
but the product of natural factors, and his life was regarded, too, as
under the domain of rigid, inviolable law. There was no room for, and no
need of, the conception of free, originative thought. Thought was
simply an answer to the demand that the sense world was making, entirely
dependent upon the external stimulus, just as any other activity was
entirely dependent on an external stimulus. So thought came to be
regarded as resulting from mere sense impression, which latter
corresponded to the external stimulus. It is obvious that the idea of
the freedom of the human soul, and of human personality as previously
understood, had to go. Man was simply the result of the interaction of
numerous causes--and like the rest of nature, involved no independent
spiritual element. Everything that was previously regarded as spiritual
was interpreted as a mere adjunct to, or a shadow of, the sense world.
Such a conception accounted for the whole of nature and of man, and so
became an explanation of the universe, a philosophy.

In such a theory self-preservation becomes the aim of life, the struggle
for existence the driving-power, and adaptation to environment the means
to the desired end. Hence it comes about that only one standard of value
remains, that of usefulness, for that alone can be regarded as valuable
which proves to be useful towards the preservation and enjoyment of the
natural life. The ideas of the good, the beautiful, and the true, lose
the glory of their original meaning, and become comparatively barren
conceptions. Hence at a stroke the spiritual world is wiped away, the
soul of man is degraded from its high position, the great truths of
religion are cast aside as mere illusions.

The naturalistic explanation possesses the apparent advantage of being a
very simple one, and hence attracts the human mind with great force in
the early stages of mental culture. All the difficulties of the
conception of a higher world are absent, for the naturalistic position
does not admit of its existence. It gives, too, some purpose to life,
even though that purpose is not an ideal one.

Eucken is not reluctant to give the theory all the credit it deserves,
and he is prepared to admit that it fulfils to some extent the
conditions which he holds a satisfactory solution should fulfil.

He goes, however, immediately to the root of the matter, and finds that
the very existence of the theory of naturalism in itself is an eloquent
disproof of the theory. The existence of a comprehensive scientific
conception involves an activity which is far superior to nature itself,
for it can make nature the object of systematic study. An intellect
which is nothing more than a mirror of sense impressions can get little
beyond such sense impressions, whereas the highly developed scientific
conception of nature that obtains to-day is far beyond a mere collection
of sense impressions. Nature, indeed, is subdued and mastered by man;
why then degrade man to the level of a universe he has mastered? To
produce from the phenomena of nature a scientific conception of nature
demands the activity of an independent, originative power of thought,
which, though it may be conditioned by, and must be related to, sense
impressions, is far above mere sense impressions.

Naturalism, in directing attention to the things that are experienced,
fails to take proper account of the mind that experiences them; it
postulates nature without mind, when only by the mind processes can man
become aware of nature, and construct a naturalistic scheme of life. "To
a thorough-going naturalism, naturalism itself is logically impossible."
Hence the impossibility of the naturalistic theory as an explanation of
life.

Then it fails to provide a high ideal for life, and to release man from
sordid motives. It gives no place for love, for work for its own sake,
for altruistic conduct, or for devotion to the high ideals of life. The
aim of life is limited to this world--man has but to aim at the
enjoyment and preservation of his own life. The mechanical explanation
of life, too, does away with the possibility of human freedom and
personality, and it is futile to urge man to greater efforts when
success is impossible. It is a theory which does justice merely to a
life of pleasure and pain, its psychology has no soul, and its political
economy bases the community upon selfishness.

In this way Eucken disproves the claim of naturalism; in doing so he
points out that a satisfactory solution must take account of the life of
nature in a way which religion and idealism have failed to do.

Of late years _Socialism_ and _Individualism_ have come into prominence
as theories of life. Eucken attributes the movements in the first
instance to the receding into the background of the idea of an overworld
which gave meaning and value to life. When doubt was thrown upon
religion and idealism, when confidence in another world was shaken, man
lost to an extent his moral support. Where could he turn now for a firm
basis to life? He might, of course, turn from the invisible world to the
world of sense, to nature. But the first result of this is to make man
realise that he is separate from nature, and again he fails to find
support. He is an alien in the world of nature, and disbelieves the
existence of a higher world. When both are denied him he turns naturally
to his fellow-men--here at least he can find community of interest--here
at least he is among beings of his own type. Hence he confines his
attention to the life of humanity, and in this, the universe of
mankind, he hopes to find an explanation of his own life, and a value
for it.

The progress of humanity, then, must become the aim of life--all our
strength and effort must be focussed upon human nature itself. But an
immediate difficulty arises. Where are we to find Man? "Is it in the
social community where individual forces are firmly welded together to
form a common life, or among individuals as they exist for themselves in
all their exhaustless diversity?" If we put the community first, then
the social whole must be firmly rooted in itself and be independent of
the caprice of its members. The duty of the individual is to subordinate
himself to the community--this means socialism. If, on the other hand,
the great aim is to develop the individual and to give him the maximum
of opportunity to unfold his special characteristics, we arrive at an
opposing theory--that of individualism.

In the history of society we find an age of socialistic ideas followed
by one of individualistic ideas, and vice versa, and there is much that
is valuable in each, in that it tends to modify and disprove the other's
extreme position.

The present wave in the direction of _socialism_ arises, to an extent,
in reaction from the extremely individualistic position of previous
ages. Man is now realising that the social relations of life are of
importance as well as the character of his own life. He realises the
interdependence of members of a community, and the conception of the
State as a whole, a unit, instead of a mere sum of individuals, grows
up. The modern industrial development and the organisation of labour
have, too, emphasised the fact that the value of the individual depends
largely upon his being a part of society. His work must be in
co-operation with the work of others to produce the best effect; for in
such co-operation it produces effects which reach far beyond his own
individual capacity. Hence his life appears to receive value from the
social relations, and the social ideal is conceived. The development of
the individual no longer becomes the aim but rather the development of
the community. In setting out the development of society as his aim, the
individual makes considerable sacrifices. All that is distinctly
individual must go, in character, in work, in science, and art, and that
which is concerned with the common need of society must receive
attention. This means undoubtedly a limitation of the life of the
individual, and often entails a considerable sacrifice; but the
sacrifice is made because of the underlying belief that in the sum of
individual judgments there is reason, and that in the opinion of the
majority there is truth. This socialistic culture finds in the present
condition of society, plenty of problems to hand, and in its treatment
of these problems a vigorous socialistic type of life is developed. The
most pressing problem is concerned with the distribution of material and
spiritual goods. Material goods and the opportunity for spiritual
culture that go with them have been largely a monopoly of the
aristocracy. Now arises a demand for a more equal distribution, and this
is felt to be a right demand, not only from the point of view of
justice, but also for the sake of spiritual culture itself. So it is
that the movement for the social amelioration of the masses starts. The
welfare of humanity is its aim, and all things, religion, science, and
art, must work towards this end, and are only of value in so far as they
contribute towards it.

Now it is a fundamental principle of a logical socialistic system that
truth must be found in the opinions of the masses, and the average
opinion of mankind must be the final arbiter of good and evil. The
tendency of the masses as such is to consider material advancement the
most cherished good. Hence, inevitably, a thorough-going socialism must
become materialistic, even though at an earlier stage it was actuated by
the desire for opportunities of spiritual culture.

A genuinely socialistic culture, too, makes the individual of value only
as a member of society. This, Eucken affirms, is only true in the most
primitive societies. As civilisation progresses, man becomes conscious
of himself, and an inner life, which in its interests is independent of,
and often opposed to society, develops. His own thought becomes
important to man, and as his life deepens, religion, science, art, work
&c., become more and more a personal matter.

All such deepening of culture, and of creative spiritual activity, is a
personal matter. From this deepening and enriching of the inner life of
the individual proceeds creative spiritual activity, which attempts
spiritual tasks as an end in themselves, and which gradually builds up a
kingdom of truth and spiritual interest which immeasurably transcends
mere human standards. All these are historical facts of experience; the
socialistic system finds no place and no explanation for them, and
consequently it cannot be regarded as a sufficiently comprehensive
explanation of the problem. To a man who has once realised these
individual experiences, the merely human, socialistic system becomes
intolerable.

Again, if considerations of social utility limit creative activity, the
creations of such activity must be meagre in nature. Spiritual
creativeness is most fruitful when it is concerned with tasks that are
attempted for their intrinsic value, and is not fettered by the thought
of their usefulness to society.

It is, too, a dangerous thing to look for truth in the opinion of the
majority, for this is such a changing phenomenon that only a part, at
most, can be permanent truth. The course of history has taught us, too,
that great ideas have come to individuals and have been rejected by the
masses for long periods of time.

The immediate effect of the failure of socialism is the encouragement of
_individualism_, for indeed some of the arguments against the former are
arguments in favour of the latter. Individualism opens up a new life, a
life which is free, joyous, and unconventional.

But can individualism give a meaning and value to life as a whole? Man
cannot from his own resources produce a high ideal which compels him to
fight for higher development, and it is not possible for him from an
individualistic standpoint to regard himself as a manifestation of a
larger life. His whole life must be spent in the improvement of his own
condition. Even in the case of strongly marked personalities, they can
never get beyond themselves and their own subjective states, for they
must always live upon themselves, and eternally reflect upon their own
doings.

But such a view of life cannot satisfy man; he is a contemplative being,
and he must find some all-inclusive whole, of which he is a part. If he
fails to find it, life for him must become a blank, and he must fall a
prey to boredom and satiety. Man's life is not to be confined to his own
particular sphere, his life must extend far beyond that--he must concern
himself with the infinite in the universe; "He must view life--nay,
more, he must live it--in the light of this larger whole." A life based
upon individualism then, will seem, even in the case of strong
personalities, to be extremely narrow. How much more so will this be
true of the ordinary man, who takes little interest in his own
individuality, or pleasure in its development?

Thus it is that both forms of humanistic culture--socialism and
individualism--fail to give a real meaning to life. "Socialistic culture
directs itself chiefly to the outward conditions of life, but in care
for these it neglects life itself." Individualistic culture, on the
other hand, endeavours to deal with life itself, but fails to see life
as a whole, or as possessing any real inwardness.

Both types of culture are apt to deceive themselves in regard to their
own emptiness, because, unconsciously, they make more out of man than is
consistent with their assumptions. "They presuppose a spiritual
atmosphere as a setting for our human life and effort. In the one case,
this cementing of a union between individuals appears to set free the
springs of love and truth; in the other, each single unit seems to have
behind it the background of a spiritual world whose development is
fostered by means of its individual labour." In this way life acquires
in both cases a meaning, but it does so only by departing from both
positions, and taking up what is, at least partly, an idealistic
position.

The theories, too, can only be made really plausible by idealising man
to an unwarrantable extent. The socialist assumes that a change of
material surroundings will be immediately followed by a change in the
character of man, and that men will work happily together for the sake
of the community. The individualist asks us to believe that man is
naturally noble and highminded, and cares only for the higher and better
things. But experience, says Eucken, does not justify us in placing so
much faith in humanity. "Do we not see the great masses of our
population possessed by a passion that sweeps all before it, a reckless
spirit of aggressiveness, a disposition to lower all culture to the
level of their interests and comprehension--evincing the while a defiant
self-assertion? And on the side of individualism, what do we see? Paltry
meanness in abundance, embroidered selfishness, idle self-absorption,
the craving to be conspicuous at all costs, repulsive hypocrisy, lack of
courage despite all boastful talk, a lukewarm attitude towards all
spiritual tasks, but the busiest industry when personal advantage is
concerned."

The theories of socialism and individualism can never be adequate
explanations of the great problem of life, for life cannot have a real
meaning if man cannot strive towards some lofty aim far higher than
himself, and such a goal the two humanistic theories do not provide for
him.

Religion, Idealism, Naturalism, Socialism, Individualism, while calling
attention to important facts in life, all fail in themselves to form
adequate theories to explain life. We have given the main outlines of
Eucken's arguments, but such a brief summary cannot do justice to his
excellent evaluations of these theories--these the reader may find in
his own works.




CHAPTER III

ANOTHER SEARCH FOR TRUTH

The result of the inquiry into the solutions of the problem offered in
the past is to show that they are all inadequate to explain and to give
an ideal to the whole of life. Perplexed as to the truth of the
existence of a higher world, man looked to the natural world for a firm
basis to life. Here he failed to find rest--rather, indeed, he found
less security than he had previously felt, for did not naturalism make
of him a mere unconscious mechanism, and deny the very existence of his
soul? Then he turned to humanity, and the opposing tendencies of
socialism and individualism came into evidence. Each hindered the other,
each shook his traditional beliefs, and each failed to give him a
satisfactory goal for life. Socialism concerned itself with external
social relations, but it gave life no soul. Then individualism confined
man to his own resources, and there resulted an inner hollowness which
became painfully evident. Socialism and individualism fail to provide a
sure footing. Instead of finding certainty, man has fallen into a still
deeper state of perplexity.

What shall he do? Must he once again leave the realistic systems of
Naturalism, Socialism, and Individualism, and return to the older
systems of Religion and Idealism? Was he not wrong in giving up the
thought of a higher invisible world? Has not the restriction of life to
the visible world robbed life of its greatness and dignity? This it
certainly has done, and there is little wonder that the soul of mankind
is already revolting, and shows a tendency once again to look towards
religion and idealism for a solution of life.

But the educated mind can never again take up exactly the same position
as it once did in regard to religion and idealism. The great realistic
theories have made too great a change in the standard of life, and in
man himself, to make it possible for him to revert simply to the old
conditions, and the older orthodox doctrines of religion can never again
be accepted as a mere matter of course. But the great question has again
come to the forefront--is there a higher world, or is the fundamental
truth of religion a mere illusion? This is the question that calls for
answer to-day, an answer which must be different, as man is different,
from the answers that were given in the past. A satisfactory answer is
impossible without understanding clearly the relation between the Old
and the New, and without taking account of the great, if partial, truths
that the realistic schemes of life have taught mankind.

To accept unreservedly Naturalism, Socialism, and Individualism is
impossible, for these rob life of its deeper meaning. To return to the
older doctrines without reserve is equally impossible.

Shall we ignore the question? This would be a fatal mistake. Some throw
themselves into the rush of work, and endeavour to forget the deeper
problems of life--but "the result is a life all froth and shimmer,
lacking inward sincerity, a life that can never in itself satisfy them,
but only keep up the appearance of doing so." There must be some
decision; for is not society being more and more broken up into small
sections, possessing the most variable standards of life, and
evaluating things in a diversity of ways? Such an inward schism must
weaken any effort on the part of humanity to combine for ideal ends.
Perhaps he of narrow vision, who sees nothing in life but sensuous
pleasure, is happy--but it is the happiness of the lower world. Perhaps,
too, he of the superficial mind is happy, who sees no deep
contradictions in the solutions offered, and is prepared to accept one
to-day and another tomorrow--but his happiness is that of the feeble
mind.

What then can be done? Shall we despair? Never! The question is far too
urgent. To despair is to accept a policy that spells disaster to the
human race. The immediate environment is powerless to give life any real
meaning. We must probe deeper into the eternal--and it is from such
investigations that Eucken outlines a new theory of life.

But before we proceed to deal with Eucken's contribution to the problem,
it will be profitable to stay awhile to consider how it is that we can
obtain truth at all, and what are the tests that we can apply to truth
when we think we have attained it. It is the problem of the possibility
of knowledge, really, that we have to discuss in brief. Eucken himself
does not pay much direct attention to this difficult question, for, as
has been already pointed out, he refuses to be drawn from his main
problem. It is impossible, however, to appreciate Eucken without
understanding clearly the position he takes up in this matter.

What is truth? How can we know?--these are entrancing problems for the
profound thinker, and have been written upon frequently and at great
length. But we can do little more at present than give the barest
outline of the positions that have been taken up. Every search for truth
must assume a certain position in this matter; in studying Eucken's
philosophy it is of the first importance--more so perhaps than in the
case of most other philosophers--to keep in mind clearly from the outset
the position he implicitly assumes.

The simplest theory of knowledge is that of _Empiricism_, which holds
that all knowledge must be gained through experience of the outside
world, and of our mental states. We see a blue wall, we obtain through
our eyes an impression of blueness, and are able to make a statement:
"This wall is blue." This, of course, is one of the simplest assertions
that can be made, and consists merely in assigning a term--"blue"--the
meaning of which has already been agreed upon, to a colour that we
appear to see on a wall. The test of the truth of this assertion is a
simple one--it is true if it corresponds with fact. If the same
assertion is made in regard to a red wall, then it is obviously untrue.
Our sense impressions give rise to a great variety of such expressions.
We state "the wall is blue" as a result of an impression obtained
through the organs of sight; then we speak of a pungent smell, a sweet
taste, a harsh sound, or a rough stone, on account of impressions
received respectively through the organs of smell, taste, hearing, and
touch. But, of course, all such assertions are superficial in
character--there is little more in them than the application of a
conventional term to an observed phenomenon, they avail us little in
solving the mysteries of the universe.

Strictly speaking, this is for the empiricist the limit of possible
knowledge, but he would be a poor investigator who would be content with
this and no more. The empiricist tries to go a distinct step in advance
of this. The scientist observing the path of a planet travelling round
the sun, finds that its course is that of an ellipse. He studies the
path of a second planet, and finds that this also travels along an
elliptical orbit. Later he finds that all planets he is able to observe
travel in the same kind of path--then he hazards a general statement,
and says, "All planets travel round their suns in elliptical orbits."
But now he has left the realm of certainty for that of uncertainty.
There may be innumerable planets which he cannot observe that take a
different course. He hazards the general statement, because he assumes
(sometimes without knowing that he does so) that nature is uniform and
constant, that it will do to-day as it did yesterday, and does in
infinite space as it does in the visible universe.

The knowledge that is possible to the empiricist, then, is merely that
which is derived from direct experience, and simple summations or
generalisations into a single assertion of a number of similar
assertions, all of which were individually derived from experience. This
is the position scientists as such, and believers in the theory of
naturalism, take up as to the possibility of the knowledge of truth to
the human mind. They are entirely consistent, therefore, when they
arrive ultimately at the agnostic position, and contend that our
knowledge must necessarily be confined to the world of experience, and
that nothing can be known of the world beyond. But they are
fundamentally wrong in overestimating the place of the sense organs, and
forgetting that while these have a part to play in life, they do not
constitute the whole of life.

A far more satisfactory theory is that of _Rationalism_. It
is a theory that admits that the human mind has some capacity for
working upon the data presented to it by the sense organs. Man is
no longer quite so helpless a creature as empiricism would make
him. He is able to weigh and consider the facts that are presented
to the mind. The method rationalism uses to arrive at truth is that
of logical deduction, and the test of truth is that the steps in the
process are logically sound. We may start from the data "All dogs
are animals" and "Carlo is a dog," and arrive very simply at the
conclusion "Carlo is an animal." The conclusion is correct because
we have reasoned in accordance with the laws of logic, with the laws
of valid thought. All logical reasoning is, of course, not so simple
as the example given, but it may be stated generally that when there
is no logical fallacy, a correct conclusion may be arrived at,
provided, too--and herein lies the difficulty--provided that the
premises are also true. These premises may be in themselves general
statements--how is their truth established? They may be, and often
are, the generalisations of the empirical sciences, and must then
possess the same degree of uncertainty that these generalisations
possess. Some philosophers have contended that certain general ideas
are innate, but few would be found nowadays to accept such a
contention. At other times mere definitions of terms may serve as
premises. One might state as a premise the definition "A straight
line is the shortest distance between two points," and the further
statement that "AB is a straight line between A and B," and conclude
that the line AB represents the shortest distance between two points A
and B. In a manner similar to this Euclid built his whole mathematical
system upon the basis of definitions and postulates, a system the
complexity and thoroughness of which has caused all students of
mathematics at one time or another to marvel and admire. But, of
course, a definition is little more than assigning a definite term to
a definite thing. It is when we begin to consider the premises that are
necessary for arriving at the profound truths of the universe that we
find the weakness of rationalism. How are we going to be provided with
premises for this end? Shall we begin by saying "There is a God" or
"There is no God"? How is the pure reasoning faculty to decide upon the
premises in the matter of the great Beyond? We may weigh the arguments
for and against a certain position, and we may think that the probability
lies in a certain direction, but to decide finally and with certainty
by mere cold logical reasoning is impossible. We may bring out into
prominence through logical reasoning truths that were previously only
implicit, but to arrive at absolute truth with regard to the invisible
world, through intellect alone, has long been admitted to be an
impossibility. The illusion of those who would believe that truth which
was not already implied in the premises could ever be obtained by mere
intellectual reasoning has long since been dispelled.

Perhaps it comes as a shock to the reader who has always insisted upon a
clear intellectual understanding and a rigid reasoning upon all things,
to find within what narrow limits, after all, the intellect itself has
to work--it can do little more than make more or less certain
generalisations concerning the world of experience, and then to argue
from these, or from definitions that it itself has framed. Of course
some of the ancient philosophers did try through a course of rigid
reasoning to solve the great problems, and for a long time it was
customary to expect that all philosophers should proceed in the same
way.

Modern philosophers, of whom William James, Bergson, and Eucken are
conspicuous examples, have appreciated the futility of such a task, and
have sought other means of solving the problem. The mistake in the past
has been to forget that the intelligence is but one aspect of human
life, and that the experience of mankind is far more complicated a
matter than that of mere intellect, and not to be solved by intellect
alone. Intellect has to play a definite part in human life, but it does
not constitute the whole of life. Life itself is far greater than
intellect, and to live is a far more important thing than to know. The
great things are life and action; knowledge is ultimately useful in so
far as it contributes to the development of life and the perfection of
action. Philosophers have for too long a period made knowledge an aim in
itself, and have neglected to take proper account of the experiences of
mankind. Their intellectual abstractions have tended to leave actual
life more and more out of consideration, with the result that they have
been baffled at every turn. The more we think about it, the more we
become convinced that the mysterious universe in which we live will only
divulge just enough of its secrets to enable us to act, and this it
gives us with comparatively little trouble on our part. If we consider
an ordinary piece of wood, we find it is hard and offers a certain
resistance, and our knowledge of these elementary facts enables us to
put it to use, but we shall never really solve the mysteries of its
formation and growth. These lead of course to very interesting
speculations, but their solution seems to be as far off as ever. We can
know little but that which we require for life. The making of life and
action the basis of truth rather than trusting to the intellect alone,
is the great new departure in modern philosophy.

One of the theories of knowledge that springs from laying emphasis upon
life and action is that of _Pragmatism_, of which the late Professor
William James was one of the greatest exponents. Pragmatists contend
that the test of truth is its value for life--if the fact obtained is
the most useful and helpful for life, then it is the true one. Suppose
we are endeavouring to solve the great question, "Is there a God?" We
weigh the arguments for and against, but find it difficult to arrive at
a definite conclusion, because the arguments on both sides seem equally
plausible. How are we to decide? We cannot postpone the decision
indefinitely--we are forced to make a choice, for upon our decision
depends our aim and ideals in life. We are faced with a "forced option,"
and must choose one or the other. We ask ourselves the question, "Which
will be of the greatest help to our lives--to believe that there is, or
that there is not a God?" and we decide or will to believe the option
that will help life most. It is a striking theory, but space forbids our
discussing it in detail.

The position Eucken adopts is that of _Activism_. In common with
pragmatism it makes truth a matter of life and action rather than of
mere intellect, and considers fruitfulness for action a characteristic
of truth. He differs from the pragmatic position in that he contends
that truth is something deeper than mere human decision, that truth is
truth, not merely because it is useful, that reality is independent of
our experience of it, and that truth is gained intuitively through a
life of action.

The riddle of the universe is solved for Eucken through life and action.
While continual contemplation and thought is apt to paralyse us, "action
is the best defensive weapon against the dangers and trials of human
existence." "Doubt is not cured by meditation, but by action." He
believes that we can attain certainty through action of much that cannot
be justified on rational grounds. If we wish to understand the vital
truths of life we must concentrate our souls on a good purpose--the
activity that follows will bring its revelation. The problems of life
are solved by the life process itself. By acting in a certain way, man
comes into intimate relationship with the great reality of life, and
then he comes to know, not so much _about_ reality, as _within_ reality.
The ant in whom such complex instincts are developed, knows probably
nothing at all _about_ its little world, but knows everything necessary
_within_ its little world. It does not err, it does the right thing at
the right time, and that because it is in tune with its universe, hence
acts from pure instinct in the right way. If intellect were to enter
into the case, its actions might become less reliable, and it would
blunder far oftener. In the case of man, his thinking capacity often
militates against successful instinctive and habitual actions--the
moment we start to consider, we hesitate and are lost. In the same way,
if the soul of man is brought into tune with the great reality, it has
but to act, and though it may never know all _about_ reality and be able
to frame abstract theories of the universe, still it may know _with_ or
_within_ reality, and be thus enabled to act in the best way under
various circumstances. This is the theory of activism; it lays great
stress upon action, and upon intuition through action, and while it does
not ignore the intellect, it holds that when the intellect fails there
is a possibility of the practical problem of life being solved through a
life of action, when life is directed towards the highest ideals. The
danger of an activistic position, of course, is to undervalue the
reasoning powers of man. Some critics hold that Eucken does this; the
reader must judge for himself, but in doing so it will be well to
remember that before trusting to intuitive revelation, Eucken demands
the setting of one's face towards the highest and best.

In the next chapter we can follow Eucken in his search for the great
reality in life.




CHAPTER IV

THE PAST, PRESENT, AND THE ETERNAL

In investigating the problem of human life, Eucken lays great stress
upon the history of man in past ages--this is one of the special aspects
of his philosophy. The fact is, of course, not surprising; he who would
explain the life of man would be unwise to ignore the records of the
past life of the human race. The thinker who examines the present only,
is apt to be narrow in his ideas, to fail to look upon events in their
proper perspective, and to be unduly affected by the spirit of the age
in which he lives--the student of history avoids these pitfalls.

Moreover, man does not become aware of the depth of his own soul, until
he has "lived into" the experience of the past. This is what the
profound investigator of history does; he lives again the life of the
hero, he feels with him as he felt upon special occasions, and in this
way there is revealed to him a profundity and greatness of human
experience, of which he would have been largely unaware if he had
trusted to his own experience alone, and to the superficial examination
he is able to make of the experiences of those living men with whom he
comes into contact. In this way he is able in a sense to appropriate the
experience of the greatest personalities unto himself, and enrich
considerably the contents of his own soul.

Through a study of history, too, we become aware of the intimate
connection that exists between the present and the past. The present
moment is a very transient thing; its roots are in the past, its hopes
in the future. "If all depends on the slender thread of the fleeting
moment of the present, which illumines and endures merely for a
twinkling of an eye, but to sink into the abyss of nothingness, then all
life would mean a mere exit into death.... Without connection there is
no content of life." We are apt to look on the past as something dead,
but it exists in living evidence in our souls to-day. It oppresses us or
stimulates us to action, it tyrannises over us or inspires us to higher
things. It has been customary to look upon the past as irrevocable.
Recent writers, of whom Maeterlinck and Eucken are striking instances,
have endeavoured to show how the past can be remoulded and changed. The
past depends upon what we make of it to-day; if we despise our evil
conduct in former days, then the past itself is changed and conquered.
The mistake that is made is to regard the past as a thing complete in
itself; what appears to be finished is really only completing itself,
and we must take a view of the whole of a thing, and not merely the
parts that have already manifested themselves. Through such
considerations we become more and more aware of the ultimate connection
between the past and present, and of the part the present can play in
the remaking of the past.

Our investigations of history leads us, too, to differentiate between
the temporary and the eternal in the realm of thought. We find at a
certain period of history a trend of thought that can largely be
accounted for by the special conditions of life at the time, and which
disappears at a later age. But in addition to this we become aware of
truths that have found a place in the thoughts of various ages and
countries, and we are led to regard these as the eternal
truths--expressions of an eternal ever-present reality. This eternal
present we find to be something independent of time, something that
breaks the barriers between the past, present, and future. "Thought,"
says Eucken, "does not drift along with time; as certainly as it strives
to attain truth it must rise above time, and its treatment must be
timeless." The beliefs of any age are too much coloured by the special
circumstances of that age to express the whole of truth, yet beneath the
beliefs of the ages there is often an underlying truth, and this
underlying truth is the eternal truth, which is not affected by time,
and at the basis of which is the eternal reality.

This eternal truth persisting through a variety of temporary and more or
less correct expressions of it is to be observed in a marked manner in
the moral ideas of mankind. What a variety of ethical doctrines have
been expounded and believed, yet how striking the similarity that
becomes apparent when they are further examined! In practice, the
standard of morality has often been based on mere utility, but it has
taken a higher and more absolute basis in the mind of man. Ideas
concerning morality have generally been nobler than can be accounted for
by environment, and by the subjective life of the individual. Why this
ultimate consistency in the moral aspirations of the ages, why a
categorical imperative, and why does conscience exist in the human
being?--these facts cannot be accounted for if there is no deeper basis
for life than the life of humanity at any definite period of time.

The unchangeable laws of logic, too, are instances of the eternal truth.
The principles of the validity of thought are entirely independent of
individuals, of the passage of time, and of the environment of man. "Our
thought cannot advance in the definite work of building up science
without producing and employing a definite logical structure, with fixed
principles; these principles are immanent in the work of thought, they
are above all the caprice and all the differences of the individuals."
Whence again this consistency in a changeable and subjective world?

The marvellous influence that ideas have exerted upon man again points
to the persistence and power of the eternal. Is it not strange how it is
that man often serves but as a mere instrument for the realisation of an
idea, and how he is often carried away by an idea to do things which are
against his own personal interests and desires? And when he and his
generation have passed beyond human sight, we often find a new
generation direct their endeavours in the same way, and we wonder what
is behind such a continuity in the struggles of mankind.

The history of great personalities in the realms of literature, art, and
science show in a remarkable way how men have risen above the influences
of their time, and beyond the cramping tiredness of the mere flesh.
Could a great thinker like Aristotle be entirely conditioned by flesh
and environment? And what of the great artists and poets who have
conquered the chains of mortal finitude and breathed of higher worlds?
Every one of them is a convincing testimony of the possibility of
mankind transcending the material, and taking unto itself of the
resources of a deeper world.

Then the dissatisfaction of the ages with their limited knowledge of
truth cannot but tell of a great eternal something that stirs at the
basis of the human soul. The people of to-day find the various systems
of the day inadequate; they search for something higher, and the mere
fact that they search beyond matter and the mere subjective human
qualities is in itself a testimony to the existence of a world higher
than the material and subjective.

What is it that makes it possible for one human being to "live into" the
experience of others who lived long ago, and for the present to conquer
and alter the past? How can we account for the eternal trait in thought,
for the unchanging laws of logic, for the consistency of moral ideals,
and their transcendence over flesh and immediate circumstances? What is
the force behind the idea, and how can we account for the continuous
struggle of mankind in certain directions? And, finally, what is it that
makes it possible for men to rise beyond themselves, to shake away the
shackles of matter and vicinity, and to delve deep into the profounder
world?

If we can find what it is that makes all this possible, then surely we
have found the greatest thing in the world--the reality. And Eucken's
answer is clear and definite. It must be something that persists, is
eternal and independent of time, and it must extend beyond the
individual to a universal whole. This must be "the Universal Spiritual
Life," which, though eternal, reveals itself in time, and though
universal, reveals itself in the individual man, and forms the source
from which the spiritual in man "draws its power and credentials."

This, then, is the result of Eucken's search for reality--he has found
it to exist in a Universal Spiritual Life. Of course he has not arrived
at his conclusion by a system of rigid proof; it has already been
pointed out how impossible it is to arrive at the greater truths of life
in such a manner.

He has done, however, that which can be reasonably expected in such
cases. To begin with, he has given us a striking analysis of the
essential characteristics of human life, and he has found there a
yearning and a void. He has given us a masterly discussion of eternal
truth as contrasted with the temporary expressions of it. He has taught
us how the present can overcome the past, and how man can ascend beyond
the subjective and material. And he has led us to feel that reality must
lie in the eternal that appears to be at the basis of the highest and
greatest in man.

Moreover, he has given a fair and thorough treatment of the solutions
that have been offered in the past. He has shown how inadequate they are
to explain life. He has shown how the modern solutions "cannot perform
their own tasks without drawing incessantly upon another kind of
reality, one richer and more substantial." This in itself shows "beyond
possibility of refutation that they do not fill the whole of life." He
has demonstrated how the acceptance of these systems depends upon an
implicit acceptance of a higher life. "The naturalistic thinker ascribes
unperceived to nature, which to him can be only a coexistence of
soulless elements, an inner connection and a living soul. Only thus can
he revere it as a higher power, as a kind of divinity; only thus can he
pass from the fact of dependence to a devotional surrender of his
feelings. The socialist bases human society, with its motives mixed with
triviality and passion, on an invisible community, an ideal humanity....
The individualist in his conception exalts the individual to a height
far more lofty than is justified by the individual as he is found in
experience." All these assume more or less unconsciously the existence
of that "something higher" which they attempt to deny.

So far, then, we have seen how Eucken proves the inadequacy of the
realistic conceptions of life, and how they really depend for their
acceptance upon the assumption of a Universal Spiritual Life. We have
still to see how he attempts to prove that basing human life upon an
eternal spiritual life satisfies the conditions he himself has laid down
for a satisfactory solution of the problem. He has to show that the
theory gives a satisfactory explanation of human life, that it gives a
firm basis for life, that it releases man from being governed by low
motives, and admits of the possibility of human personality, freedom,
and creation. We shall see in the chapters that follow that he makes a
convincing case for accepting the belief in the Universal Spiritual Life
as the basis of human life and endeavour.




CHAPTER V

THE "HIGH" AND THE "LOW"

Eucken makes the recognition of the existence of a Universal Spiritual
Life the starting-point of his constructive work. He takes up a position
which he calls the nöological position. Many theories take up a
materialistic position; they assert the reality of the material world,
and endeavour to explain the world of matter as something independent of
the human mind. Other theories assert the superiority of mind over
matter, and endeavour to examine the mind as though it were independent
of the material world. These two types of theories have been in
continual conflict; the one has attempted to prove that thought is
entirely conditioned by sense impressions received from the material
world, the other regards the phenomena of nature as really nothing other
than processes of the mind.

Eucken finds reality existing in the spiritual life, which while neither
material nor merely mental, is superior to both, admits the existence
(in a certain sense) of both, and does away with the opposition between
the rival types of theories. Eucken does not minimise or ignore the
existence of the natural world. The question for him is not the
independent existence of the worlds of nature and mind--this he admits;
he is concerned rather with the superiority of the spiritual life over
the merely material and mental.

The natural life of man has been variously viewed in different ages. The
writer of the Pentateuch described man as made in the image of God, and
the natural man was exalted on this account. Some of the old Greek
philosophers, too, found much in nature that was divine. Christianity
took a different view of the matter--it exalted the spirit, and
emphasised the baseness of the material. The growth of the sciences made
man again a mere tool of laws and methods, but it considered matter as
superior to mind, mind being entirely dependent upon impressions
received from matter. The question continually recurs--which is the
high, which is the low? Shall nature triumph over spirit, or spirit over
nature?

Pantheism replies to the question by denying that there is anything high
as distinguished from the low. There is but one; and that one--the whole
universe--is God. There is no evil in the world, says pantheism,
everything is good--if we could understand things as they really are we
should find no oppositions in the universe, and no contradictions in the
nature of things. The world as it is, is the best of all possible
worlds--there is perfect harmony, though we fail to appreciate it. Other
optimistic theories, too, deny the existence of evil and pain, and try
to explain our ideas of sin to be mere "points of view." If we could see
the whole, they tell us, we should see how the parts harmonise, but now
we only see some of the parts and fail to appreciate the harmony. In
this way they try to explain away as unreal the phenomena of evil and
pain.

But Eucken has no patience with such theories. For him the oppositions
and contradictions of life are too real and persistent. The antagonisms
"stir us with disgust and indignation." Evil cannot be considered
trivial, and must not be glossed over; it is in the world, and the more
deeply we appreciate the fact the better it will be for the human soul.

Man in his lower stages of development is just a child of nature, and
his standards of life are those of the lower world. He seeks those
things that satisfy the senses, he attempts the satiation of the lower
cravings. In the realm of morals his standard is utility--that is good
which helps him to obtain more pleasure and to avoid pain. In social
life his conduct is dictated by custom--this is the highest appeal. The
development of man along the lines of nature ends at this point--and if
nothing more is to happen, then he must remain at a low level of
development. Matter and mind cannot take him beyond--the mind as such
only helps towards the further satisfaction of the lower demands of man.

But there is something far greater in highly developed manhood than the
petty and selfish. Man is capable of conceiving and adopting higher
standards of morality than those of utility and pleasure, and it is the
spiritual life that enables him to do this. It is the spiritual that
frees the individual from the slavery of the sense world--from his
selfishness and superficial interests--that teaches him to care less for
the things of the flesh, and far more for the beautiful, the good, and
the true, and that enables him to pursue high aims regardless of the
fact that they may entail suffering and loss in other directions. This,
then, is the "High" in the world; the natural life is the "Low."

But what is the relation of the natural to the spiritual life? In the
first place, the spiritual cannot be derived from the natural, inasmuch
as the former is immensely superior to the latter, and that not merely
in degree, but in its very essence. The spiritual is entirely on a
higher plane of reality, and there cannot be transition from the natural
to the spiritual world. The natural has its limitations, and beyond
these cannot go. So far as the natural world is concerned man can never
rise above seeking for pleasure, and making expediency and social
approbation the standards of life, hence there is little wonder that
those ethical teachers who make nature their basis, deny the possibility
of action that is unselfish and free. "The Spiritual Life," however, as
Eucken says, "has an independent origin, and evolves new powers and
standards."

Neither do the two aspects run together in life in parallel lines. On
the contrary, the spiritual life cannot manifest itself at all until a
certain stage of development is reached in nature. It would seem
impossible to conceive of the animal rising above its animal instincts
and tendencies; its whole life is conditioned by its animal nature and
its environment. Man stands at the junction of the stages between the
purely natural and the purely spiritual. On the one hand, he is a member
of the animal world, he has its instincts, its desires and its
limitations; on the other hand, he has within him the germ of
spirituality. He belongs to both worlds, the natural and the spiritual.
He cannot shake off the natural and remain a man--to separate the two
means death to man as we know him. But there is a great difference
between his position in the natural world and his position in the
spiritual world. He seems to be the last word in the world of nature, he
has reached heights far beyond those reached by any other flesh and
blood. He is, so far as we know, the culminating point of natural
evolution--the final possibility in the natural world. But the stage of
nature only represents the first stage in the development of the
universe.

There is an infinitely higher stage of life, the spiritual life. And if
man is the final point of progress in the world of nature, he is, in his
primitive state, only at the threshold of the spiritual world. But he
is not an entire stranger to the spiritual--the germ is in him, and the
spiritual is consequently not an alien world for him. If the spiritual
were something entirely foreign it would be vain to expect much progress
through mere impulses from without. On the contrary, it is the spiritual
that makes man really great, and is the most fundamental part of his
nature.

The two stages of life, then, are present in man--the natural and the
spiritual; the former highly developed, the latter, at first, in an
undeveloped state.

Now the great aim of the universe is to pass gradually from the natural
to the spiritual plane of life. This does not mean that the latter is
the product of the former stage, for this is not the case. It means that
the deeper reality in life is the spiritual, and that the spiritual
develops through the natural in its own particular way. And this
particular way is not a mere development but a _self_-development. The
aim of the spiritual is to develop its own self through the human being.
In this way man is given the possibility of developing a self--a
personality in a very real sense.

Thus we arrive at some idea of the relation there exists between the
spiritual and the natural, and of the place of the spiritual and the
natural in man. The spiritual is neither the product nor an attribute of
the natural. Man is the border creature of the two worlds; he represents
the ultimate possibility of the one, and possesses potentialities in
regard to the other. The great object of his life must be to develop,
through making use of and conquering the life of nature, his higher self
into a free, spiritual, and immortal personality. The progressive stages
in this direction must be dealt with in the next chapter.




CHAPTER VI

THE ASCENT TO FREEDOM AND PERSONALITY


In the previous chapter we found that man in his primitive stage is
largely a creature of the lower world. His desires are those of the
animal kingdom, his ideal is utility, and social approbation his God. At
this stage he is a mere nothing, no better than a slave to his passions
and to the opinions of his fellow-beings. He possesses neither freedom
nor personality--for he is but a tool in the hands of other impulses and
forces. There is no controlling self--he is not a lord in his own
kingdom. Some men do not get beyond this very low level, but for ever
remain mere shuttlecocks driven hither and thither by more or less
contradictory impulses.

The germ of the higher world that resides within him may sometimes make
itself felt, but "so long as there is a confused welter of higher and
lower impulses, ... so long is there an absence of anything essentially
new and lofty."

Man's aspirations for things that are higher, are at the outset very
sluggish and vague, for a being that is so much dominated by the natural
world is apt to concentrate its attention upon it and to remain
contented with it.

But there comes a time in the lives of perhaps most men when a distinct
feeling of dissatisfaction is felt with the life of natural impulse and
of convention. The man feels--perhaps in a vague way at first--that
there is something too merely animal in the sense world, or that there
is an intolerable emptiness and hypocrisy in a life of slavish devotion
to the opinions of society. Perhaps he feels that his passions govern
him, and not he his passions. The higher life stirs within him, and he
begins to question the rightness of things. He learns to appreciate for
the first time that the natural impulses may not be the noblest, and
that custom may not be an ideal guide. His soul is astir with the
problem of life--the result very largely depends upon the solutions that
are presented to him. Perhaps the naturalistic solution is made to
appeal to him, and he is taught to trust nature and it will lead him
aright. Or maybe the pantheistic theory is accepted by him, and he is
led to believe that the world as it is is entirely good, and that he has
but to live his life from day to day, and not worry himself about the
ultimate end and purpose of things. Or other optimistic theories of life
that deny the existence of evil may influence him. All these solutions
may give him temporary peace of mind, and perhaps indeed form efficient
stumbling-blocks to any further spiritual progress.

But the spiritual beginnings within us often show remarkable vitality.
They may under certain conditions lead us to appreciate the existence of
a distinct opposition in the world--the opposition between the lower
world and the higher self. Man finds that the natural is often low,
evil, and sordid, and at this stage the higher spiritual world makes a
strong appeal to him. By degrees he comes to feel the demands of the
lower world to be a personal insult to him. What is the lower material
world that it should govern him, and he a _man_? The claims of pleasure
and utility to be standards of conduct strike him as arrogant, and he
revolts against the assumption that higher aims can have no charm for
him. His previous acceptance without consideration of the moral
standard of the community he now looks upon as a sign of weakness on his
part--for is he not himself, a person with the power of independent
judgment and evaluation? It is the first great awakening of the
spiritual life in man, when his whole soul is in revolt against the low,
sordid, and conventional. What shall he do? There is only one course
that is worthy of his asserting personality--he must break with the
world. Henceforth he sees two worlds in opposition--the world of the
flesh on the one hand, the world of the spirit on the other, and he
arrays himself on the side of the higher in opposition to the lower.
When he does this the spiritual life in him makes the first substantial
movement in its onward progress--this movement Eucken calls the
_negative movement_. It does not mean that the man must leave the world
of work and retire into the seclusion of a monastery--that means
shirking the fight, and is a policy of cowardice. Neither does it mean a
wild impatience with the present condition of the world--it means rather
that man is appreciating in a profound way the oppositions that exist,
and is casting his lot on the side of right. He renounces everything
that hinders him from fighting successfully, then goes forth into the
thick of the battle. The break must be a definite one and made in a
determined manner. "Without earnestness of renunciation the new life
sinks back to the old ... and loses its power to stimulate to new
endeavour. As human beings are, this negation must always be a sharp
one."

The negative movement, then, is the first substantial step in the
progress of the spiritual life. The man's self breaks out into
discontent with nature, and this is the first step to the union of self
to the higher reality in life. The break with the world is in itself of
course but a negative process. This must attain a positive significance.
If the self breaks away from one aspect of life, it must identify itself
more intimately with another. This occurs when the individual sets out
definitely on a course of life in antagonism to the evil in the world.

When this takes place, there arises within him a _new immediacy_ of
experience. Hitherto the things that were his greatest concern, and that
appealed to him most, were the pleasures of the natural world. But these
things appeal to him no longer as urgent and immediate--but as being of
a distinctly secondary character. A new immediacy has arisen; it is the
facts of the spiritual world that now appeal to him as urgent and
immediate. "All that has hitherto been considered most immediate, as the
world of sense, or even the world of society, now takes a second place,
and has to make good its claim before this spiritual tribune.... That
which current conceptions treat as a Beyond ... is now the only world
which exists in its own right, the only true and genuine world which
neither asks nor consents to be derived from any outside source."

This new immediacy is the deepest possible immediacy, it is an immediacy
of experience where the self comes into contact with its own vital
principle--the Universal Spiritual Life--and brings about a fundamental
change in the life of the individual. The inner life is no longer
governed by sense impressions and impulses, but the outward life is
lived and viewed from the standpoint of the inward life.

But a new immediacy is not all that follows in the train of the negative
movement--on the contrary, the highest possible rewards are gained, for
freedom, personality, and immortality are all brought within the range
of possibility.

Once a human being decides for the highest he is on the highroad to
complete freedom. The freedom is not going to be won in a moment, but
must be fought for by the individual through the whole course of his
life. His body is always with him, and will at times attempt to master
him--he must fight continually to ensure conquest. Difficulties will
arise from various quarters, but he is not going to depend only upon his
own resources. All his activity involves in the first place the
recognition of the spiritual world, but more than this, he appropriates
unto himself of the spiritual world--this in itself is an act of
decision. And the more we appropriate unto ourselves of the Universal
Spiritual Life, the more we decide for the higher world, the freer we
become. Indeed, "it is this appropriation ... of the spiritual life that
first awakens within the soul an inward certitude, and makes possible
that perfect freedom ... so indispensable for every great creative
work." By continually choosing and fighting for the progress of the
Universal Spiritual Life, it comes to be our own in virtue of our deed
and decision. Hence man has attained freedom--the lower world no longer
makes successful appeal. He has become a part of the spiritual world,
and his actions are no longer dictated by anything external, but are the
direct outcome of his own self. He has freely chosen the highest, and
continually reaffirms his choice--this is perfect freedom.

Man gains for himself, too, a personality in the true sense of the term.
Eucken does not mean by personality "mere self-assertion on the part of
an individual in opposition to others." He means something far deeper
than this. "A genuine self," says Eucken, "is constituted only by the
coming to life of the infinite spiritual world in an independent
concentration in the individual." Following a life of endeavour in the
highest cause, and continual appropriation of the spiritual life, he
arrives at a state of at-one-ness with the universal life. "Man does not
merely enter into some kind of relation with the spiritual life, but
finds his own being in it." The human being is elevated to a self-life
of a universal kind, and this frees him from the ties and appeals of the
world of sense and selfishness. It is a glorious conception of human
personality, infinitely higher than the undignified conceptions of
naturalism and determinism.

And if man wins a glorious personality, he may gain immortality too.
Unfortunately, Eucken has not yet dealt fully with this question, but he
is evidently of the opinion that the spiritual personalities are
immortal. As concentration points or foci of the spiritual life, he
believes that the developed personalities are at present and in prospect
possessors of a spiritual realm. But there will be no essential or
sudden change at death. That which is immortal is involved in our
present experience. Those who have developed into spiritual
personalities, who have worked in fellowship with the great Universal
Life, and become centre-points of spirituality, have thus risen supreme
over time and pass to their inheritance. Those who have not done so, but
have lived their lives on the plane of nature, will have nothing that
can persist.

Hence it is that the negative movement leads to freedom, personality,
and immortality; the neglect to make the movement consigns the
individual to slavery, makes a real "self" impossible, and at death he
has nought that a spiritual realm can claim. The choice is an
all-important one; for, as a recent writer puts it, "In this choice, the
personality chooses or rejects itself, takes itself for its life-task,
or dies of inanition and inertia."




CHAPTER VII

THE PERSONAL AND THE UNIVERSAL


In the last chapter the ascent of the human being from serfdom to
freedom and personality was traced. In doing so it was necessary to make
frequent reference to the Universal Spiritual Life.

When we turn to consider the characteristics of the Universal Spiritual
Life, many problems present themselves. How can we reconcile freedom and
personality with the existence of an Absolute? What is the nature of
this Absolute, and in what way is the human related to it? What place
should religion play in the life of the spiritual personality? These
are, of course, some of the greatest and most difficult problems that
ever perplexed the mind of man, and we can only deal briefly with
Eucken's contribution to their solution.

Can a man choose the highest? This is the form in which Eucken would
state the problem of freedom. His answer, as already seen, is an
affirmative one. The personality chooses the spiritual life, and
continually reaffirms the decision. This being so, it is now no longer
possible to consider the human and the divine to be entirely in
opposition. And the more the spiritual personality develops, so much the
less does the opposition obtain, until a state of spirituality is
arrived at when all opposition of will ceases--then we attain perfect
freedom. "We are most free, when we are most deeply pledged--pledged
irrevocably to the spiritual presence, with which our own being is so
radically and so finally implicated." Thus freedom is obtained in a
sense through self-surrender, but it is through this same self-surrender
that we realise spiritual absoluteness. Hence it is that perfect freedom
carries with it the strongest consciousness of dependence, and human
freedom is only made possible through the absoluteness of the spiritual
life in whom it finds its being.

English philosophers have dealt at length with the question of the
possibility of reconciling the independence of personality and the
existence of an Absolute. From Eucken's point of view the difficulty is
not so serious. When he speaks of personality he does not mean the mere
subjective individual in all his selfishness. Eucken has no sympathy
with the emphasis that is often placed on the individual in the low
subjective sense, and is averse from the glorification of the individual
of which some writers are fond. Indeed, he would prefer a naturalistic
explanation of man rather than one framed as a result of man's
individualistic egoism. The former explanation admits that man is
entirely a thing of nature; the latter, from a selfish and proud
standpoint, claims for man a place in a higher world. There is nothing
that is worthy and high in the low desires of Mr. Smith--the mere
subjective Mr. Smith. But if through the mind and body of Mr. Smith the
Absolute Spirit is realising itself in personality--then there is
something of eternal worth--there is spiritual personality. There will
be opposition between the sordidness of the mere individual will and the
divine will, but that is because the spiritual life has not been gained.
When the highest state of spiritual personality has been reached, then
man is an expression--a personal realisation of the Absolute, is in
entire accord with the absolute, indeed becomes himself divine.

This does not rob the term personality of its meaning, for each
personality does, in some way, after all, exist for itself. Each
individual consciousness has a sanctity of its own. But the
being-for-self develops more and more by coming into direct contact with
the Universal Spiritual Life.

Here, then, we arrive at something that appears to be a paradox. We have
the phenomenon of a being that is free and existing for itself, yet in
some way dependent upon an absolute spiritual life. We have, too, the
phenomenon of a human being becoming divine. How is it really possible
that self-activity can arise out of dependence? Eucken does not attempt
to explain, but contends that an explanation cannot be arrived at
through reasoning. We are forced to the conclusion, we realise through
our life and action that this is the real state of affairs, and in this
case the reality proves the possibility. "This primal phenomenon," he
says, "overflows all explanation. It has, as the fundamental condition
of all spiritual life, a universal axiomatic character." Again he says,
"The wonder of wonders is the human made divine, through God's superior
power." "The problem surpasses the capacity of the human reason." For
taking up this position, Eucken is sharply criticised by some writers.

When we approach the problem of the nature of the Absolute in itself,
the main difficulty that arises is whether God is a personal being. God,
says Eucken, is "an Absolute Spiritual Life in all its grandeur, above
all the limitations of man and the world of experience--a Spiritual Life
that has attained to a complete subsistence in itself, and at the same
time to an encompassing of all reality." The divine is for Eucken the
ultimate spirituality that inspires the work of all spiritual
personalities. When in our life of fight and action we need inspiration,
we find "in the very depths of our own nature a reawakening, which is
not a mere product of our activity, but a salvation straight from God."
God, then, is the ultimate spirituality which inspires the struggling
personality, and gives to it a sense of unity and confidence. Eucken
does not admit that God is a personality in the sense that we are, and
deprecates all anthropomorphic conceptions of God as a personal being.
Indeed, to avoid the tendency to such conceptions he would prefer the
term "Godhead" to "God." Further considerations of the nature of God can
only lead to intellectual speculations. For an activistic philosophy,
such as Eucken's philosophy is, it would seem sufficient for life and
action to know that all attempts at the ideal in life, originate in, and
are inspired by, the Absolute Spiritual Life, that is by God.

We cannot discuss fully the relation of human and divine without, too,
dealing with the ever urgent problem of religion. This is a problem in
which Eucken is deeply interested, and concerning which he has written
one of his greatest works--_The Truth of Religion_--a work that has been
described as one of the greatest apologies for religion ever written.

What is religion? Most people perhaps would apply the term to a system
of belief concerning the Eternal, usually resting upon a historical or
traditional basis. Others would include in the term the reverence felt
for the Absolute by the contemplative mind, even though that mind did
not believe in any of the traditional systems. Some would emphasise the
fact that religion should concern itself with the establishment of a
relationship between the human and the Divine.

But Eucken does not find religion to consist in belief, nor in a mere
attitude towards the mysteries of an overworld. In keeping with the
activistic tone of his whole philosophy he finds religion to be rooted
in life, and would define religion as an action by which the human being
appropriates the spiritual life.

The first great concern of religion must be the conservation--not of
man, as mere man, but of the spiritual life in the human being, and it
means "a mighty concentration of the spiritual life in man." The
essential basis that makes religion possible is the presence of a Divine
life in man--"it unfolds itself through the seizure of this life as
one's own nature." Religion must be a form of activity, which brings
about the concentration of the spiritual life in the human soul, and
sets forth this spiritual life as a shield against unworthy elements
that attempt to enter and to govern man.

The essential characteristic of religion must be the demand for a new
world. "Religion is not a communication of overworld secrets, but the
inauguration of an overworld life." Religion must depend upon the
contradiction and opposition that exists in human life, and upon the
clear recognition of the distinction between the "high" and the "low" in
life. It must point to a means of attaining freedom and redemption from
the old world of sin and sense, and to the possibility of being elevated
into a new and higher world. It must, too, fight against the extremes of
optimism and pessimism, for while it will acknowledge the presence of
wrong, it will call attention to the possibility of deliverance. It must
bring about a change of life, without denying the dark side of life; it
must show "the Divine in the things nearest at hand, without idealising
falsely the ordinary situation of life."

The great practical effect of religion, then, must be to create a demand
for a new and higher world in opposition to the world of nature. For
this new life religion must provide an ultimate standard. "Religion must
at all times assert its right to prove and to winnow, for it is
religion--the power which draws upon the deepest source of life--which
takes to itself the whole of man, and offers a fixed standard for all
his undertakings." Religion must provide a standard for the whole of
life, for it places all human life "under the eternity." It is not the
function of religion to set up a special province over against the other
aspects of his life--it must transform life in its entirety, and affect
all the subsidiary aspects.

But religion is not gained, any more than human freedom, once for all
time--it must be gained continually afresh, and sought ever anew. Thus
the fact of religion becomes a perpetual task, and leads to the highest
activity.

Eucken speaks of two types of religion--Universal and Characteristic
Religion. The line of division between them is not easy to draw, but the
distinction gives an opportunity for emphasising again the essential
elements of true religion.

_Universal Religion_ is a more or less vague appreciation of the
Spiritual, which results in a diffused, indefinite spiritual life. The
personality has appreciated to some extent the opposition between the
natural and the spiritual, and has chosen the spiritual. He adopts a new
attitude or mood, towards the world in consequence, and that is an
attitude of fight against the world of nature. But everything is vague;
the individual has not yet appreciated the spiritual world as his own,
and feels that he is a stranger in the higher world, rather than an
ordinary fully privileged citizen. He has not yet associated himself
closely enough with the Universal Spirit, everything is superficial,
there is hunger and thirst for the higher things in life, but these have
not yet been satiated.

Some people never get beyond this vague appreciation of the spiritual
until perhaps some great trial or temptation, a long illness or sad
bereavement falls to their lot. Then they feel the need for a religion
that is more satisfying than the Universal Religion with which they have
in the past been content. They want to get nearer to God; they feel the
need of a personal God who is interested in their trials and troubles.
They are no longer satisfied with the conception of a God that is far
away, they thirst for His presence. This feeling leads the individual to
search for a more definite form of religion, in which the God is
regarded as supremely real, and reigns on the throne of love. The
personality enters into the greater depths of religion, and it becomes a
much more real and powerful influence in his life. He has no longer a
mere indefinite conception of a Deity, but he thinks of God as real and
personal. Instead of adopting a changed attitude towards the world of
nature, he comes to demand a new world. He is now a denizen of the
spiritual world, and there results "a life of pure inwardness," which
draws its power and inspiration from the infinite resources of the
Universal Spiritual Life in which he finds his being. This type of
religion Eucken calls _Characteristic Religion_.

The historical religions would seem to represent, to some extent, the
attempts of humankind to arrive at a religion of this kind. A further
distinction arises between the historical forms of religion, of which
one at most, if any, can express the final truth, and the Absolute form
of religion, which if not yet conceived, must ultimately express the
truth in the matter of religion.

Eucken is never more brilliant than he is in the examination he makes of
the historical forms of religion, for the purpose of formulating the
Absolute and final form; some account of this must be given in the next
chapter.




CHAPTER VIII

RELIGION: HISTORICAL AND ABSOLUTE


In examining the various historical forms of religion, Eucken, as we
should expect, is governed by the conclusions he has arrived at
concerning the solution of the great problem of life, and especially of
the place of religion in life.

A religion which emphasised the need for a break with the world, and of
fight and action for spiritual progress, the possibility of a new higher
life of freedom and of personality, and the superiority of the spiritual
over the material, and which presented God as the ultimate spiritual
life, in which the human personality found its real self, would thus
meet with highest favour, while a form of religion that failed to do so
would necessarily fail to satisfy the tests that he would apply.

He does not spend time discussing various religions in detail, but deals
with them briefly in general, in order to show that the Christian
religion is far superior to all other religions, then he makes a
critical and very able examination of the Christian position. He
considers it necessary to discuss in detail only that form of religion
that is undoubtedly the highest.

The historical religions he finds to be of two types--religions of law
and religions of redemption. The religions of law portray God as a being
outside the world, and distinct from man, One who rules the world by
law, and who decrees that man shall obey certain laws of conduct that
He lays down. Failure to obey these laws brings its punishment in the
present or in a future life, while implicit obedience brings the highest
rewards. To such a God is often attributed all the weaknesses of the
human being, sometimes in a much exaggerated form--hence His reign
becomes one of fear to His subjects.

A religion of law assumes that man is capable of himself of obeying the
law, and is responsible for his mode of life; it assumes that man is
capable through his own energy of conquering the world of sin, and of
leading the higher life.

Religions of this type possess of course the merit of simplicity,
transparency, and finality. The decrees, the punishments and rewards are
given with some clearness and are easily understood; there is no appeal
and little equivocation. They served a useful purpose in the earlier
ages of civilisation, but cannot solve the problem for the complex
civilisation and advanced culture of the present age. They place God too
far from man, and attribute to man powers which he cannot of himself
possess. The conceptions of the Deity involved in them are too
anthropomorphic in character--too much coloured by human frailties.

The religions of law have had to give place to those of a superior
type--the religions of redemption. These religions appreciate the
difficulty there exists for humankind of itself to transcend the world
of sin, and are of two types--one type expressing a merely negative
element, the other a negative and positive element.

The typical negative redemptive religion is that of Buddhism. Buddhism
teaches us that the world is a sham and an evil; and the duty of man is
to appreciate this fact, and to deny the world, but here the matter
ends--it ends with world-renunciation and self-renunciation. There is
only a negative element in such a religion, no inspiration to live and
fight for gaining a higher world. This, of course, cannot provide a
satisfactory solution to the problem, for no new life with new values is
presented to us. It is a religion devoid of hope, for it does not point
to a higher life. "A wisdom of world-denial, a calm composure of the
nature, an entire serenity in the midst of the changing scenes of life,
constitute the summit of life."

Christianity teaches us that the world is full of misery and suffering,
but the world in itself is really a perfect work of Divine wisdom and
goodness. "The root of evil is not in the nature of the world, but in
moral wrong--in a desertion from God." Sin and wickedness arise from the
misuse and perversion of things which are not in themselves evil.
Christianity calls for a break from the wickedness of the world. It
calls upon man to give up his sin, to deny, or break with, the evil of
which he is guilty. But it does not expect man to do this in his own
strength alone--God Himself comes to his rescue. Unlike Buddhism, it
does not stay at the denial of the world, but calls upon man to become a
citizen of a higher world. This gives a new impetus to the higher life;
man finds a great task--he has to build a kingdom of God upon the earth.
This demands the highest efforts--he must fight to gain the new world,
and must keep up the struggle to retain what he has gained. The
inferiority of Buddhism as contrasted with Christianity is well
described by Eucken in the following words: "In the former an
emancipation from semblance becomes necessary; in the latter an
overcoming of evil is the one thing needful. In the former the very
basis of the world seems evil; in the latter it is the perversion of
this basis which seems evil. In the former, the impulses of life are to
be entirely eradicated; in the latter, on the contrary, they are to be
ennobled, or rather to be transformed. In the former, no higher world of
a positive kind dawns on man, so that life finally reaches a seemingly
valid point of rest, whilst upon Christian ground life ever anew ascends
beyond itself."

From such considerations as these, Eucken comes to the conclusion that
of the redemptive religions, which are themselves the highest type,
Christianity is the highest and noblest form, hence his main criticism
is concerned with the Christian religion. This does not mean that he
finds neither value nor truth in any other form of religion. His general
conclusion with regard to the historical religions is that they "contain
too much that is merely human to be valued as a pure work of God, and
yet too much that is spiritual and divine to be considered as a mere
product of man." He finds in them all some kernel of truth, or at least
a pathway to some part of truth, but contends that no religion contains
the whole truth and nothing but the truth. "As certainly," he says, "as
there is only one sole truth, there can be only one absolute religion,
and this religion coincides entirely in no way with any one of the
historical religions."

Eucken's great endeavour in his discussion of the Christian religion is
to bring out the distinction between the eternal substance that resides
in it and the human additions that have been made to it in different
ages, between the elements in Christianity that are essentially divine
and those essentially human. Divested of its human colourings and
accretions, Christianity presents a basis of Divine and eternal truth,
and this regarded in itself, can well claim to be the final and absolute
religion.

The conclusion he has come to with regard to the eternal truth as
contrasted with the temporary colourings of Christianity, with the
essential as contrasted with the inessential, can best be outlined by
taking in turn some of the main tenets and characteristics of the
Christian faith.

Eucken's conception of the negative movement is very much akin to the
Christian idea of _conversion_. The first stage is merely a movement
away from the world, but after a time, in the continuous process of
negation, the negative movement attains a positive significance; when
this stage is arrived at Eucken would apply the term conversion. He
would not limit the negative movement to one act or to one point in
time; the movement towards a higher world must be maintained--the
sustaining of the negative movement being a test of the reality of
conversion. The process of conversion is not a process to be passively
undergone, or to originate from without, but is a movement starting in
the depths of one's own being.

As already pointed out, Eucken believes in _redemption_. The past is
capable of reinterpretation and transformation, because we can view our
past actions in a new light and so change the whole, since the past is
not a closed thing, definite in itself, but a part of an incomplete
whole. He considers, however, that the Christian doctrine of redemption
makes it too much a matter of God's mercy, instead of placing stress
upon the part that man himself must play. The possibility of redemption
in his view follows from the presence and movement of the spiritual life
in man, not merely from an act of the founder of Christianity, and he
avers that while traditional Christianity emphasises the need for
redemption from evil, it does not emphasise sufficiently the necessary
elevation to the good life that must result.

Closely bound up with the Christian doctrine of redemption is that of
_mediation_. Eucken believes that the Christian conception of mediation
resulted from the feeling of worthlessness and impotence of man, and the
aspirations which yet burned within him after union with the Divine. The
idea of mediation bridges the gulf, "a mid-link is forged between the
Divine and the human, and half of it belongs to each side; both sides
are brought into a definite connection which could be found in no other
way." Eucken acknowledges that such a mediation seems to make access to
the Divine easier, gives intimacy to the idea of redemption, and offers
support for human frailty. But he points out that there is an
intolerable anthropomorphism involved in the idea, that it removes the
Divine farther away from man, and that the union of Divine and human is
held to obtain in one special case only--that of Christ. He urges that
in a religion of mediation, one or other, God or Christ, must be chosen
as the centre. "Concerning the decision there cannot be the least doubt;
the fact is clear in the soul-struggles of the great religious
personalities, that in a decisive act of the soul the doctrinal idea of
mediation recedes into the background, and a direct relationship with
God becomes a fact of immediacy and intimacy."

So Eucken will have nothing to do with the idea of mediation in its
doctrinal significance--pointing out that "the idea of mediation glides
easily into a further mediation." "Has not the figure of Christ receded
in Catholicism, and does not the figure of Mary constitute the centre of
the religious emotional life?"

He does, however, lay great store by the help that a man may be to other
men in their upward path: "The human, personality who first and foremost
brought eternal truth to the plane of time, and through this
inaugurated a new epoch, remains permanently present in the picture of
the spiritual world, and is able permanently to exercise a mighty power
upon the soul ... but all this is far removed from any idea of
mediation."

Eucken believes in _revelation_, but through action, and not through
contemplation. To the personality struggling upward, with its aims set
towards the highest in life, the spiritual life reveals itself. He does
not confine revelation to certain periods in time, and believes that
such revelation comes to all spiritual personalities.

He holds, too, that the spiritual personalities are themselves
revelations of the Universal Spiritual Life, and that the Spiritual Life
does reveal itself most clearly in personalities.

How the revelation comes he does not discuss in any detail, but he is
very certain that it comes through action and fight for the highest.

It is perhaps largely due to his activistic standpoint that Eucken does
not deal with _prayer_. In the _Truth of Religion_, which deals very
fully with most aspects of religion, and purports to be a complete
discussion of religion, no treatment of prayer is given. He speaks of
the developing personality as drawing upon the resources of the
Universal Spiritual Life, but this appears to be in action, and not in
prayer or communion.

He is ever suspicious of intellectual contemplation, and this leads him
to attribute less importance than perhaps he should to _mysticism_, to
prayer, adoration, and worship. He admits that mysticism contains a
truth that is vital to religion, but complains that it becomes for many
the whole of religion. Its proper function is to liberate the human mind
from the narrowly human, and to emphasise a total-life, the great Whole.
It fails, however, "because it turns this necessary portion of religion
into the sole content. To it, religion is nothing other than an
absorption into the infinite and eternal Being--an extinguishing of all
particularity, and the gaining of a complete calm through the suspension
of all the wear and tear of life."

Eucken's discussion of _faith and doubt_ is very illuminating. He
protests against the conception of faith which concerns itself merely
with the intellectual acceptance of this or that doctrine. This narrows
and weakens its power, confining it to one department of life; whereas
faith is concerned with the whole of life.

Faith is for Eucken "a conviction of an axiomatic character, which
refuses to be analysed into reasons, and which, indeed, precedes all
reasons ... the recognition of the inner presence of an infinite
energy."

If faith concerns itself with, and proceeds from the whole of life, it
will then take account of the work of thought, and will not set itself
in opposition to reason. But it will lead where reason fails. It is not
limited by intellectual limitations, though it does not underrate or
neglect the achievements of the intellect. Faith enables life to
"maintain itself against a hostile or indifferent world; ... it holds
itself fast to invisible facts against the hard opposition of visible
existence."

The vital importance of such faith to religion is clearly evident; and
bound up with this is the significance of doubt. Doubt, too, becomes
now, not an intellectual matter, but a matter for the whole of life. "If
faith carries within itself so much movement and struggle, it is not
surprising ... if faith and doubt set themselves against each other, and
if the soul is set in a painful dilemma." Eucken considers it to be an
inevitable, and indeed a necessary accompaniment of religious
experience, and his own words on the point are forcible and clear.
"Doubt ... does not appear as something monstrous and atrocious, though
it would appear so if a perfect circle of ideas presented itself to man
and demanded his assent as a bounden duty. For where it is necessary to
lay hold on a new life, and to bring to consummation an inward
transformation, then a personal experience and testing are needed. But
no proof is definite which clings from the beginning to the final
result, and places on one side all possibility of an antithesis. The
opposite possibility must be thought out and lived through if the Yea is
to possess full energy and genuineness. Thus doubt becomes a necessary,
if also an uncomfortable, companion of religion; it is indispensable for
the conservation of the full freshness and originality of religion--for
the freeing of religion from conventional forms and phrases."

Eucken's views on _immortality_ have already been dealt with. He does
not accept the Christian conception of it, for he seems to limit the
possibility to those in whom spiritual personalities have been
developed, and he evidently does not believe that the "natural
individuality with all its egoism and limitations" is going to persist.

In discussing the question of _miracle_, Eucken weighs the fact that a
conviction of the possibility of miracle has been held by millions in
various religions, and particularly in Christianity. He considers that
the question of miracle is of more importance in the Christian religion
than in any other, one miracle--the Resurrection--having been taken
right into the heart of Christian doctrine. He finds, however, that the
miracle is entirely inconsistent with an exact scientific conception of
nature, and means "an overthrow of the total order of nature as this
has been set forth through the fundamental work of modern
investigation." He does not consider such a position can be held without
overwhelming evidence, and does not feel the traditional fact to have
this degree of certainty, or to be inexplicable in another way. He
considers that the explanation of the miracle probably lies in the
psychic state of the witnesses.

Eucken shows in general extreme reluctance to make a historical event a
foundation of belief, and this no doubt accounts to some extent for his
attitude with regard to miracles. He points out that "the founders of
religion have themselves protested against a craving after sensuous
signs," and that this protest "is no other than the sign of spiritual
power and of a Divine message and greatness." He considers that the
belief in, and craving for, sensuous miracle is an outcome of a
"mid-level of religion," where belief is waning and spirituality
declining. While, thus, he does not believe in sensuous miracle, he
acknowledges and lays the greatest stress on one miracle--the presence
of the Spiritual Life in man. It is, indeed, this miracle that renders
others unnecessary.

In discussing the doctrine of the _Incarnation_, Eucken attempts to get
at the inner meaning--the truth which the doctrine endeavours to
express, and he finds this to consist in the fact of the ultimate union
of the human and Divine, and this truth is one that we dare not
renounce. He criticises the attempt that is made in Christianity to show
that such union only obtained once in the course of history. Incarnation
is not one historical event, but a spiritual process; not an article of
belief, but a living experience of each spiritual personality.

He considers as injurious to religion in general the Christian
conception of the _Atonement_. He believes that the idea that is to be
expressed is that of the nearness of God to man in guilt and in
suffering. In endeavouring to express this close intimacy the idea of
suffering was transferred to God himself. The anthropomorphic idea of
reconciliation and substitution thus arose, and this Eucken considers to
have done harm. "The notion that God does not help us through His own
will and power, but requires first of all His own feeling of pity to be
roused, is an outrage on God and a darkening of the foundation of
religion." So Eucken objects to the attempt to formulate the mystery
into dogma. "All dogmatic formulation of such fundamental truths of
religion becomes inevitably a rationalism and a treatment of the problem
by means of human relationships, and according to human standards." "It
is sufficient for the religious conviction to experience the nearness of
God in human suffering, and His help in the raising of life out of
suffering into a new life beyond all the insufficiency of reason.
Indeed, the more intuitively this necessary truth is grasped, the less
does it combine into a dogmatic speculation and the purer and more
energetically is it able to work."

The conception of the _Trinity_ is again an attempt to express the union
of Divine and human, "the inauguration of the Divine Nature within human
life." The dogma, however, involves ideas of a particular generation,
and so threatens to become, and has indeed become, burdensome to a later
age which no longer holds these ideas. Further, the doctrine of the
Trinity has mixed up a fundamental truth of religion with abstruse
philosophical speculations, and this has provided a stumbling-block
rather than a help.

At the same time, Eucken lays the greatest stress on the _personality of
Jesus_. He considers the personality of Jesus to be of more importance
to Christianity than is the personality of its founder to any other
religion. "Such a personality as Jesus is not the mere bearer of
doctrines, or of a special frame of mind, but is a convincing fact, and
proof of the Divine life, a proof at which new life can be kindled over
anew." And again: "It is from this source that a great yearning has been
implanted within the human breast ... a longing for a new life of love
and peace, of purity and simplicity. Such a life, with its incomparable
nature and its mysterious depths, does not exhaust itself through
historical effects, but humanity can from hence ever return afresh to
its inmost essence, and can strengthen itself ever anew through the
certainty of a new, pure, and spiritual world over against the
meaningless aspects of nature and over against the vulgar mechanism of a
culture merely human." But while he would appreciate the depth and
richness of the personality of Jesus, he protests against the worship of
Jesus as divine, and the making of Him the centre of religion. The
greatness of Christ is confined to the realm of humanity, and there is
in all men a possibility of attaining similar heights.

Christianity is, in Eucken's view, much more closely bound up with
historical events than any other religion, and it thus suffers more
severe treatment at the hands of historical criticism than any other
religion. Eucken considers such historical criticism to be of great
value. In Christianity as in other religions we find the eternal not in
its pure form, but mixed with the temporal and variable, and historical
criticism will help in the separation of the temporal from the eternal
elements. In so doing it does an immense service, for it frees religion
from fixation to one special point of time, and enables us to regard it
as ever developing and progressing to greater depths.

Eucken emphasises that the _historical basis_ of Christianity is not
Christianity itself, is not essentially religious; and he quotes
Lessing, Kant, and Fichte to support him in his contention that a belief
in such a historical basis is not necessary to religion, and may even
prove harmful to it. The historical basis is, of course, useful as
bringing out into clear relief the personality of Jesus, and the other
great spiritual personalities associated in His work, and Eucken lays
stress upon the use that history can be to Christianity in giving
records of the experiences of great spiritual personalities in all ages,
but it is important that the history is here a means to an end, and not
an end in itself, and that the importance lies in the spiritual
experience and not in the historical facts.

When one considers how little Eucken has to say concerning worship, and
how little emphasis he places upon historical and doctrinal forms in
religion, one wonders how it is he attaches so much importance to the
functions of the _Church_. He points out that a Church is necessary to
religion, that it seems to be the only way of making religion real and
effective for man. "The Church seems indispensable in order to introduce
and to hold at hand the new world and the new life to man in the midst
of his ordinary existence; it is indispensable in order to fortify the
conviction and to strengthen the energy in the midst of all the opposite
collisions; it is indispensable in order to uphold an eternal truth and
a universal problem in the midst of the fleetingness of the moment." In
the past, however, much harm has been done to religion by the Church.
This has arisen from several reasons. To begin with, it tends to narrow
religion, which is concerned with life, to the realm of ideas, and to
tie down religion by connecting it with a thought-system of a particular
age. Further, the necessary mechanical routine, and the appointment of
special persons to carry out this routine, tends to elevate the routine
and these special persons to a far higher place than they should occupy.
Again, spiritual things have been dragged into the service of personal
ambition, and bound up with human interests. The most serious danger,
however, is that religion, from being an inward matter, tends to become
externalised.

Despite this, an organised Church cannot be dispensed with, and Eucken
points out what changes are necessary to make the Church effective. One
important point he makes clear, namely, that as the Church must speak to
all, and every day, and not only to spiritually distinguished souls, and
in moments of elevated feeling, then the teaching of the Church will
always lag behind religion itself, and must be considered as an
inadequate expression of it.

It is necessary that there should be no coercion with regard to men's
attitude towards the Church, and men should be free to join this or that
Church, or no Church at all.

Then there must be more freedom, movement, and individuality within the
Church. What the Church holds as a final result of the experience of
life cannot be expected as the confession of all, especially of the
young. "How can every man and every child feel what such a mightily
contrasted nature as Luther's with all its convulsive experiences felt?"

Then the Church must not so much teach this or that doctrine as point to
the Spiritual Life, set forth the conditions of its development, and be
the representative of the higher world. Thus, and thus only, Eucken
thinks that the Church can fulfil its proper function, and avoid being a
danger to religion.

Eucken's _appreciation of Christianity_ is sincere. Viewing it from the
standpoint of the Spiritual Life, he finds that it fulfils the
conditions that religion should fulfil. It is based on freedom, and on
the presence of the Divine in humanity, even to the extent of a complete
union between them. The ideal of the Christian life is a personal life
of pure inwardness, and of an ethical character. He speaks of the "flow
of inner life by means of which Christianity far surpasses all other
religions," and of the "unfathomable depth and immeasurable hope which
are contained in the Christian faith."

In Christianity the life of Christ has a value transcending all time,
and is a standard by which to judge all other lives. There is, too, in
Christianity a complete transformation or break, which must take place
before any progress or development can take place.

"There is no need of a breach with Christianity; it can be to us what a
historical religion pre-eminently is meant to be--a sure pathway to
truth, an awakener of immediate and intimate life, a vivid
representation and realisation of an Eternal Order which all the changes
of time cannot possess or destroy."

At the same time, there are changes necessary in the form of
Christianity, if it is to answer to the demands of the age, and be the
Absolute Religion. It must be shorn of temporary accretions, and must
cast aside the ideas of any one particular age which have now been
superseded. No longer can it retain the primitive view of nature and the
world which formerly obtained, no longer must it take up a somewhat
negative and passive attitude, but, realising that religion is a matter
of the whole life, must energetically work itself out through all
departments of life. It must remedy wrong, not merely endure it. It must
proceed from a narrow and subjective point of view to a cosmic one,
without at the same time losing sight of the fact that religion is an
inward and personal matter. It must take account to the full of the
value of man as man, and of the possibilities latent in him, and take
account of his own activity in his salvation.

The Christian ideal of life must be a more joyous one, of greater
spiritual power, and the idea of redemption must not stop short at
redemption from evil, but must progress to a restoration to free and
self-determining activity. Since an absolute religion is based on the
spiritual life, the form in which it is clothed must not be too
rigid--life cannot be bound within a rigid creed. With its form modified
in this way, Eucken considers that Christianity may well be the Absolute
Religion, and that not only we can be, but we _must_ be Christians if
life is to have for us the highest meaning and value.




CHAPTER IX

CONCLUSION: CRITICISM AND APPRECIATION


We have attempted to enunciate the special problem with which Eucken
deals, and to follow him in his masterly criticisms of the solutions
that have been offered, in his further search for the reality in life,
in his arguments and statement of the philosophy of the spiritual life,
and finally in his profound and able investigation into the eternal
truth that is to be found in religion. In doing so, we have only been
able in a few cases to suggest points of criticism, and sometimes to
emphasise the special merits of the work. It was necessary to choose
between making a critical examination of a few points, and setting forth
in outline his philosophy as a whole. It was felt that it would be more
profitable for the average reader if the latter course were adopted.
Thousands who have heard the name of Eucken and have read frequent
references to him are asking, "What has Eucken really to say?" and we
have attempted to give a systematic, if brief, answer to the question.
Having done this it will be well to mention some of the main points of
criticism that have been made, and to call attention again to some of
the remarkable aspects of the contributions he has made to philosophy
and religion.

Several critics complain of the obscurity of his writings, of his loose
use of terms, and of his tendency to use freely such indefinite and
abstruse terms as "The Whole," "The All," &c., and of his tendency to
repeat himself. Of course, if he is guilty of these faults, and he
certainly is to some extent, they are merely faults of style, and do not
necessarily affect the truth or otherwise of his opinions. In the matter
of clarity he is very variable; occasional sentences are brilliantly
clear, others present considerable difficulty to the practised student.
His more popular works, however, are much clearer and easier to
understand than the two standard treatises on _The Truth of Religion_
and _Life's Basis and Life's Ideal_. His tendency to repetition is by no
means an unmixed evil, for even when he appears to be repeating himself,
he is very often in reality expressing new shades of meaning, which help
towards the better understanding of the first statements.

The slight looseness in the use of terms, and a certain inexactness of
expression that is sometimes apparent, must of course not be
exaggerated; it is by no means serious enough to invalidate his main
argument. It gives an opportunity for a great deal of superficial
criticism on the part of unsympathetic writers, which, however, can do
little harm to Eucken's position. One has to remember that it is
difficult to combine the fervour of a prophet with pedantic exactness,
and that an inspired and profound philosopher cannot be expected to
spend much time over verbal niceties.

Of course one would prefer absolute clarity and exactness, but we must
guard against allowing the absence of these things to prejudice us
against the profound truths of a philosophical position, which are not
vitally affected by that absence.

Frequent criticism is directed towards the incompleteness of Eucken's
philosophy. He does not introduce his philosophy with a systematic
discussion of the great epistemological and ontological problems.
Philosophers have often introduced their work in this way, and it has
been customary to expect an introduction of the kind. To do so, however,
would be quite out of keeping with Eucken's activistic position, as it
would necessarily involve much intellectual speculation, and he does not
believe that the problem of life can be solved by such speculation. It
is unfortunate that he has so little to say concerning the world of
matter. Beyond insisting upon the superiority of the spiritual life,
which he calls the "substantial," over matter, which he calls the merely
"existential," he tells us very little about the material world. Rightly
or wrongly, thinkers are deeply interested in the merely existential, in
the periphery of life, in the material world, but for the solution of
this problem Eucken contributes little or nothing. His sole concern is
the spiritual world, and although we should like an elaboration of his
views on the mere periphery of life, we must not let the fact that he
does not give it, lead us to undervalue his real contributions. Another
serious incompleteness lies in the fact that he pays little attention to
the psychological implications of his theories. Until he does this, his
philosophy cannot be regarded as complete. Eucken, however, would be the
last to claim that his solution is a finished or final one; he is
content if his work is a substantial contribution to the final solution.

Objection has been taken to the fact that he starts upon his task with a
definite bias in a certain direction. He candidly admits from the outset
that his aim is to find a meaning for life, and in doing this he of
course tacitly assumes that life has a deep and profound meaning. Strict
scientists aver that the investigator must set out without prejudice, to
examine the phenomena he observes; and Eucken's initial bias may form a
fatal stumbling-block to the acceptance of his philosophy by these, or
indeed, by any who are not disposed to accept this fundamental position.
If we deny that life has a meaning, then Eucken has little for us; but
if we are merely doubtful on the matter, the reading of Eucken will
probably bring conviction.

Many critics point to the far-reaching assumptions he makes. He assumes
as axiomatic certainties and insoluble mysteries the existence of the
spiritual life in man, the union of the human and divine, and the
freedom of the spiritual personalities, though in a sense dependent upon
the Universal Spiritual Life. This of course does not mean that he is in
the habit of making unjustifiable assumptions. This is far from being
the case; on the contrary, he takes the greatest care in the matter of
his speculative bases. There are some fundamental facts of life,
however, which according to Eucken are proved to us by life itself; we
feel they must be true, but they are not truths that can be reasoned
about, nor proved by the intellect alone. These are the three great
facts mentioned above, which, while not admitting of proof, must be
regarded as certainties.

His contention that they cannot be reasoned about has led to the further
charge of irrationalism. The question that has to be decided is, whether
Eucken in emphasising the fact that great truths must be solved by life
and action, is underestimating the part that intellect must play in
life. The decision must be largely one of individual opinion. Many
critics are of the opinion that he does lay too little stress upon the
intellectual factor in life. In actual fact, however, the fault is more
apparent than real, for Eucken does in fact reason and argue closely
concerning the facts of life. The charge, too, is to some extent due to
the fact that he continually attacks the over-emphasis on the
intellectual that the people of his own race--the Germans--are apt to
place. With the glorification of the intellect he has no sympathy, for
he feels there is something higher and more valuable in life than
thought--and that is action.

These are the main points of criticism that have been raised--the reader
must judge for himself how seriously they should be regarded. But before
arriving at a final opinion he must think again of the contributions
Eucken has indubitably made to philosophy and religion, of which we
shall again in brief remind him.

He has given us a striking examination of the various theories of life,
and has ably demonstrated their inadequacy. He has displayed great
scholarship in his search for the ultimate reality. He has found this
reality in the universal life, and has urged the need for a break with
the natural world in order to enter upon a higher life. He has traced
the progress of the spiritual life, and has given us ultimately a bold
vindication of human personality and of the freedom of the spiritual
being.

He has raised philosophy from being mere discussions concerning abstract
theories to a discussion of life itself. In this way philosophy becomes
not merely a theory concerning the universe, nor merely a theory of
life, but a real factor in life itself--indeed it becomes itself a life.
Thus has he given to philosophy a higher ideal, a new urgency--by his
continued emphasis upon the spiritual he has given to philosophy a
nobler and a higher mission. He has placed the emphasis in general upon
life, and has pointed out the inability of the intellect to solve all
life's problems. He has given to idealistic philosophies a possible
rallying-point, where theories differing in detail can meet on common
ground. As one eminent writer says: "The depth and inclusiveness of
Eucken's philosophy, the comprehensiveness of its substructure and its
stimulating personal quality, mark it out as the right rallying-point
for the idealistic endeavour of to-day."

And what does he give to religion? Many will reply that he has given us
nothing that is not already in the Christian religion. Therein lies the
value and strength of Eucken's contributions. He has given a striking
vindication of the spiritual content of Christianity as against the
effects of time changes. He has attempted to bring out the contrast
between what is really vital, and what are merely temporary colourings
and accretions. He makes many of the main elements of Christianity
acceptable without the need of a historical basis or proof. Not only
does he present the Christian position as a reasonable view of the
problem of life, but as the only solution that can really solve the
final problem. He has cleared the decks of all superfluous baggage, and
has laid bare a firm basis for a practical, constructive endeavour.

He has given us in himself a profound believer in the inward and higher
nature of man, and in the existence of the spiritual life. As one critic
says: "The earnestness, depth and grandeur, humility and conscious
choice of high ideals, have raised his work far above mere intellectual
acuteness and minuteness."

In Eucken we have one of the greatest thinkers of the age--some would
say _the_ greatest--setting his life upon emphasising the spiritual at a
time when the tendency is strongly in materialistic directions. He has
gathered around him a number of able and whole-hearted disciples in
various countries, and future ages may find in Eucken the greatest
force in the revulsion of the twentieth century (that is already making
itself felt) from the extreme materialistic position, to take religion
up again, and particularly the Christian religion, as the only
satisfying solution of humanity's most urgent problem.

------------------

  A darkening sky and a whitening sea,
  And the wind in the palm trees tall;
  Soon or late comes a call for me,
  Down from the mountain or up from the sea,
  Then let me lie where I fall.

  And a friend may write--for friends there be,
  On a stone from the gray sea wall,
  "Jungle and town and reef and sea--
  I loved God's Earth and His Earth loved me,
  Taken for all in all."



Today is your day and mine, the only day we have, the day in which we
play our part. What our part may signify in the great whole, we may not
understand, but we are here to play it, and now is our time. This we
know, it is a part of action, not of whining. It is a part of love, not
cynicism. It is for us to express love in terms of human helpfulness.
This we know, for we have learned from sad experience that any other
course of life leads toward decay and waste.




The Philosophy of Despair



The Bubbles of Sáki.


From Fitzgerald's exquisite version of the Rubáiyát of Omar Khayyám, I
take the following quatrains which may serve as a text for what I have
to say:

  So when the angel of the darker Drink
  At last shall find you by the river-brink,
  And offering you his cup, invite your Soul
  Forth to your lips to quaff, you shall not shrink.

  Why, if the soul can fling the Dust aside,
  And naked on the air of Heaven ride,
  Wert not a shame--wert not a shame for him
  In this clay carcase crippled to abide?

  'Tis but a tent where takes his one-day's rest
  A Sultan to the realm of Death addrest;
  The Sultan rises, and the dark Ferrásh
  Strikes, and prepares it for another guest.

  And fear not lest Existence, closing your
  Account, and mine, shall know the like no more;
  The Eternal Sáki from that bowl hath pour'd
  Millions of bubbles like us, and will pour.

  When you and I behind the veil are past,
  Oh, but the long, long while the world shall last,
  Which of our coming and departure heeds
  As the Sev'n Seas shall heed a pebble-cast.

  A moment's halt--a momentary taste
  Of Being from the Well amid the waste,
  And lo!--the phantom caravan has reach'd
  The Nothing it set out from--O, make haste!

  * * *

  There was the door to which I found no key;
  There was the veil through which I could not see:
  Some little talk awhile of Me and Thee
  There was--and then no more of Thee and Me.

  * * *

  Why, all the Saints and Sages who discuss'd
  Of the two worlds so learnedly are thrust
  Like foolish prophets forth; their words to scorn
  Are scatter'd and their mouths are stopt with dust.

  With them the seed of wisdom did I sow,
  And with my own hand wrought to make it grow
  And this was all the harvest that I reap'd--
  "I come like water, and like wind I go."

  * * *

  Ah Love, could thou and I with Him conspire
  To grasp this sorry scheme of Things entire,
  Would we not shatter it to bits--and then
  Re-mould it nearer to the heart's desire!

  Yon rising Moon that looks for us again--
  How oft hereafter will she wax and wane;
  How oft hereafter rising look for us
  Through this same garden--and for one in vain!

  And when like her, O Sáki, you shall pass
  Among the guests, star-scattered on the grass,
  And in your blissful errand reach the spot
  Where I made one--turn down an empty glass!

  * * *

And, again, in another poem from Carmen Silva's Roumanian folk-songs:

  Hopeless.

  Into the mist I gazed, and fear came on me,
  Then said the mist: "I weep for the lost sun."

  We sat beneath our tent;
  Then he that hath no hope drew near us there,
  And sat him down by us.
  We asked him: "Hast thou seen the plains, the mountains?"
  And he made answer: "I have seen them all."
  And then his cloak he showed us, and his shirt,
  Torn was the shirt, there, close above the heart,
  Pierced was the breast, there, close above the heart--
  The heart was gone.
  And yet he trembled not, the while we looked,
  And sought the heart, the heart that was not there.
  He let us look. And he that had no hope
  Smiled, that we grew so pale, and sang us songs.
  Then we did envy him, that he could sing
  Without a heart to suffer what he sang.
  And when he went, he cast his cloak about him,
  And those that met him, they could never guess
  How that his shirt was torn about the heart,
  And that his breast was pierced above the heart,
  And that the heart was gone.

  I gazed into the mist, and fear came on me,
  Then said the mist: "I weep for the lost sun."

This poem of Omar and of Fitzgerald is perhaps our best expression of
the sadness and the grandeur of insoluble problems. It is the sweetness
of philosophical sorrow which has no kinship with misery or distress. In
the strains of the saddest music the soul finds the keenest delight. The
same sweet, sorrowful pleasure is felt in the play of the mind about the
riddles which it cannot solve.

In the presence of the infinite problem of life, the voice of Science is
dumb, for Science is the coördinate and corrected expression of human
experience, and human experience must stop with the limitations of human
life. Man was not present "When the foundations of the Earth were laid,"
and beyond the certainty that they were laid in wisdom and power, man
can say little about them. Man finds in the economy of nature "no trace
of a beginning; no prospect of an end!" He may feel sure, with Hutton,
that "time is as long as space is wide." But he cannot conceive of space
as actually without limit, nor can he imagine any limiting conditions.
He cannot think of a period before time began, nor of a state in which
time shall be no more. The mind fails before the idea of time's eternal
continuity. So time becomes to man merely the sequence of the earthly
events in which he and his ancestors have taken part. Even thus limited
it is sadly immortal, while man's stay on the earth is but of "few days
and full of trouble." "Oh, but the long, long while this world shall
last!" or as the grim humorist puts it, "we shall be a long time dead."

Though the meaning of time, space, existence lies beyond our reach, yet
some sort of solution of the infinite problem the human heart demands.
We find in life a power for action, limited though this power may be.
Life is action, and action is impossible if devoid of motive or hope.

It is my purpose here to indicate some part of the answer of Science to
the Philosophy of Despair. Direct reply Science has none. We cannot
argue against a singer or a poet. The poet sings of what he feels, but
Science speaks only of what we know. We feel infinity, but we cannot
know it, for to the highest human wisdom the ultimate truths of the
universe are no nearer than to the child. Science knows no ultimate
truths. These are beyond the reach of man, and all that man knows must
be stated in terms of his experience. But as to human experience and
conduct, Science has a word to say.

Therefore Science can speak of the causes and results of Pessimism. It
can touch the practical side of the riddle of life by asking certain
questions, the answers to which lie within the province of human
experience. Among these are the following:

Why is there a "Philosophy of Despair?"

Can Despair be wrought into healthful life?

In what part of the Universe are you and what are you doing?

Personal despair or discouragement may rise from failure of strength or
failure of plans. This is a matter of every-day occurrence. The "best
laid schemes o' mice and men" generally go wrong, no doubt, but this
fact has little to do with the Philosophy of Pessimism. It is natural
for mice and men to try again and to gain wisdom from failures. "By the
embers of loss we count our gains."

The Pessimism of Youth we may first consider: In the transition from
childhood to manhood great changes take place in the nervous system.
There is for a time a period of confusion, in which the nerve cells are
acquiring new powers and new relations. This is followed by a time of
joy and exuberance, a sense of a new life in a new world, a feeling of
new power and adequacy, the thought that life is richer and better worth
living than the child could have supposed.

To this in turn comes a feeling of reaction. The joys of life have been
a thousand times felt before they come to us. We are but following part
of a cut-and-dried program, "performing actions and reciting speeches
made up for us centuries before we were born." The new power of manhood
and womanhood which seemed so wonderful find their close limitations. As
our own part in the Universe seems to shrink as we take our place in it,
so does the Universe itself seem to grow small, hard and unsympathetic.
Very few young men or young women of strength and feeling fail to pass
through a period of Pessimism. With some it is merely an affectation
caught from the cheap literature of decadence. It then may find
expression in imitation, as a few years ago the sad-hearted youth turned
down his collar in sympathy with the "conspicuous loneliness" that took
the starch out of the collar of Byron. "The youth," says Zangwill,
"says bitter things about Life which Life would have winced to hear had
it been alive." With others Pessimism has deeper roots and finds its
expression in the poetry or philosophy of real despair.

This adolescent Pessimism cannot be wrought into action. The mood
disappears when real action is demanded. The Pessimism of youth vanishes
with the coming of life. Through the rush of the new century, the fad of
the drooping spirit has already given way to the fad of the strenuous
life. Equally unreasoning it may be, but far more wholesome.

But if action is impossible, the mood remains. And here arises the
despair of the highly educated. The purpose of knowledge is action. But
to refuse action is to secure time for the acquisition of more
knowledge. It is written in the very structure of the brain that each
impression of the senses must bring with it the impulse to act. To
resist this impulse is in turn to destroy it and to substitute a dull
soul-ache in its place. "Much study is a weariness of the flesh, and the
experience of all the ages brings only despair if it cannot be wrought
into life. This lack of balance between knowledge and achievement is the
main element in a form of ineffectiveness which with various others has
been uncritically called Degeneration. As the common pleasures which
arise from active life become impossible or distasteful, the desire for
more intense and novel joys comes in, and with the goading of the thirst
for these comes ever deeper discouragement.

At the best, the tendency of large knowledge, not vitalized by practical
experience, is to spend itself in cynical criticism, in futile efforts
to tear down without feeling the higher obligation to build up. For it
is the essence of this form of Pessimism to feel that there is nothing
on earth worth the trouble of building. The real is only a "sneering
comment" on the ideal, and man's life is too short to make any action
worth while.

  "With her the seed of Wisdom did I sow,
  And with mine own hands wrought to make it grow;
  And this is all the harvest that I reap'd,
  'I come like water, and like wind I go.'"

One of the few things that we may know in life is this, that it is
impossible for man to know anything absolutely. The power of reasoning
is a mere "by-product in the process of Evolution." It is but an
instrument to help out the confusion of the senses, and it is
conditioned by the accuracy of the sense-perceptions with which it
deals. There is no appeal from experience to reason, for reason is
powerless to act save on the facts of human experience. Speculative
philosophy can teach us nothing. The senses and the reason are intensely
practical and all, our faculties are primarily adapted to immediate
purposes. Instruments such as these cannot serve to probe the nature of
the infinite. But no other instruments lie within reach of man. If we
cannot "reach the heart of reality" by reason, what indeed can we reach?
What right have we to know or to believe? And if we can know or believe
nothing, what should we try to do? And how indeed can we do anything?
Every man's fate is determined by his heredity and his environment. In
the Arab proverb he is born with his fate bound to his neck. In the
course of life we must do that which has been already cut out for us.
Our parts were laid for us long before we appeared to take them. He is
indeed a strong man who can vary the cast or give a different cue to
those who follow. Nature is no respecter of persons, and to suppose that
any man is in any degree "the arbiter of his own destiny" is pure
illusion. We are thrust forth into life, against our will. Against our
will we are forced to leave it. We find ourselves, as has been said, "on
a steep incline, where we can veer but little to the left or right";
whichever way we move we fall finally to the very bottom. The fires we
kindle die away in coals; castles we build vanish before our eyes. The
river sinks in the sands of the desert. The character we form by our
efforts disintegrates in spite of our effort. If life be spared we find
ourselves once again helpless children. Whichever way we turn we may
describe the course of life in metaphors of discouragement.

To the pessimistic philosopher the progress of the race is also mere
illusion. There is no progress, only adaptation. Every creature must fit
itself to its environment or pass away. The beast fits the forest for
the same reason that the river fits its bed. Life is only possible under
the rare conditions in which life is not destroyed.

In such fashion we may ring the changes of the despair of philosophy. If
we are to take up the threads of life by the farther end only, we shall
never begin to live, for only those which lie next us can ever be in our
hand. To grasp at ultimate truth is to be forever empty-handed. To reach
for the ultimate end of action is never to begin to act.

Deeper and more worthy of respect is the sadness of science. The effort
"to see things as they really are," to get out of all make-believe and
to secure that "absolute veracity of thought" without which sound action
is impossible does not always lead to hopefulness.

There is much to discourage in human history,--in the facts of human
life. The common man, after all the ages, is still very common. He is
ignorant, reckless, unjust, selfish, easily misled. All public affairs
bear the stamp of his weakness. Especially is this shown in the
prevalence of destructive strife. The boasted progress of civilization
is dissolved in the barbarism of war. Whether glory or conquest or
commercial greed be war's purpose, the ultimate result of war is death.
Its essential feature is the slaughter of the young, the brave, the
ambitious, the hopeful, leaving the weak, the sickly, the discouraged to
perpetuate the race. Thus all militant, nations become decadent ones.
Thus the glory of Rome, her conquests and her splendor of achievement,
left the Romans at home a nation of cowards, and such they are to this
day. For those who survive are not the sons of the Romans, but of the
slaves, scullions, the idlers and camp-followers whom the years of Roman
glory could not use and did not destroy. War blasts and withers all that
is worthy in the works of man.

That there seems no way out of this is the cause of the sullen despair
of so many scholars of Continental Europe. The millennium is not in
sight. It is farther away than fifty years ago. The future is narrowing
down and men do not care to forecast it. It is enough to grasp what we
may of the present. We hear "the ring of the hammer on the scaffold."
"Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die." "The sad kings," in
Watson's phrase, can only pile up fuel for their own destruction, and
the failure of force will release the unholy brood which force has
caused to develop. The winds of freedom are tainted by sulphurous
exhalations. In all our merry-making we find with Ibsen that "there is a
corpse on board." The mask is falling only to show the Death's head
there concealed. Aristocracy, Democracy, Anarchy, Empire, the history of
politics, is the eternal round of the Dance of Death.

When we look at human nature in detail we find more of animal than of
angel, and the "veracity of thought and action," which is the choicest
gift of Science, is lost in the happy-go-lucky movement of the human
mob. "To see things as they really are" is the purpose of the philosophy
of Pessimism in the hands of its worthiest exponents. But we know what
is, and that alone, even were such knowledge possible, is not to know
the truth. The higher wisdom seeks to find the forces at work to produce
that which now is. The present time is the meeting time of forces; the
present fact their temporary product. To the philosophy of Evolution,
"every meanest day is the conflux of two eternities." Each meanest fact
is the product of the world-forces that lie behind it; each meanest man
the resultant of the vast powers, alive in human nature, struggling
since life began. And these forces, omnipotent and eternal, will never
cease their work.

To the philosophy of Pessimism, the child is a mere human larva, weak,
perverse, disagreeable, the heir of mortality, with all manner of
"defects of doubt and taints of blood," gathered in the long experience
of its wretched parentage.

In the more hopeful view of Evolution the child exists for its
possibilities. The huge forces within have thrown it to the surface of
time. They will push it onward to development, which may not be much in
the individual case, but beyond it all lie the possibilities of its
race. Inherent in it is the power to rise, to form its own environment,
to stand at last superior to the blind forces by which the human will
was made. With this thought is sure to come, in some degree, the
certainty that the heart of the Universe is sound, that though there be
so many of us in the world, each must have his place, and each at last
"be somehow needful to infinity." We can see that each least creature
has its need for being. The present justifies the past. It is the
transcendent future which renders the commonplace present possible.

  The "dragons of the prime,
  That tore each other in the slime,"

lived and fought that we their descendants may realize ourselves in
"lives made beautiful and sweet," through all unlikeness to dragons. It
was necessary that every foot of soil in Europe should be crimsoned by
blood, wantonly shed, to bring the relative peace and tolerance of the
civilization of Europe today. It always "needs that offense must come"
to bring about the better condition in which each particular offense
shall be done away. For the evolution of life is not in straight lines
from lower to higher things, but runs rather in wavering spirals. It is
the resultant of stress and storm. The evil and failure which darken the
present are necessary to the illumination of the future. Time is long.
"God tosses back to man his failures" one by one, and gives him time and
strength to try again.

According to Schopenhauer, we move across the stage of life stung by
appetite and goaded by desire, in pain unceasing, the sole respite from
pain, the instant in which desire is lost in satisfaction. To do away
with desire is to destroy pain, but it also destroys existence. Desire
is lost where the "mouth is stopped with dust," and with death only
comes relief from pain.

Thus the Pessimist tells us that "the only reality in life is pain." But
surely this is not the truth. He who knows no reality save appetite has
never known life at all. The realities in life are love and action; not
desire, but the exercise of our appointed functions.

Action follows sensation. The more we have to do the more accurate must
be our sensations, the greater the hold environment has upon us. Broader
activities demand better knowledge of our surroundings. Greater
sensitiveness to external things means greater capacity for pain, hence
greater suffering, when the natural channels of effort are closed. Thus
arises the hope for nothingness in which many sensitive souls have
indulged. With no surroundings at all, or with environment that never
varies, there could be no sense-perception. To see nothing, to feel
nothing--there could be no demand for action. With no failure of action
there could be no weariness. From the varied environment of earthly life
spring, through adaptation, the varied powers and varied sensibilities,
susceptibilities to joy and pain as well as the rest. The greater the
sensitiveness the greater the capacity for suffering. Hence the
"quenching of desire," the "turning toward Nirvana, the desire to
escape from the hideous bustle of a world in which we are able to take
no part, is a natural impulse with the soul which feels but cannot or
will not act.

  "Can it be, O Christ in Heaven,
  That the highest suffer most,
  That the strongest wander farthest
  And most hopelessly are lost?--

  That the mark of rank in Nature
  Is capacity for pain,
  And the anguish of the singer
  Marks the sweetness of the strain?

That this must be so rests in the very nature of things. The most
perfect instrument is one most easily thrown out of adjustment. The most
highly developed organism is the most exactly fitted to its functions,
the one most deeply injured when these functions are altered or
suppressed.

Man's sensations and power to act must go together. Man can know nothing
that he cannot somehow weave into action. If he fails to do this in one
form or another, it is through limitations he has placed on himself. Man
cannot suffer for lack of "more worlds to conquer," because his power to
conquer worlds is the product of his own 'past life and his own past
needs. To weave knowledge into action is the antidote for ennui. To
plan, to hope, to do, to accomplish the full measure of our powers,
whatever they may be, is to turn away from Nirvana to real life. A
useful man, a helpful man, an active man in any sense, even though his,
activity be misdirected or harmful, is always a hopeful man.

The feeling that "the only reality in life is pain," is the sign not of
philosophical acuteness but of bodily under-vitalization. The nervous
system is too feeble for the body it has to move. To act is to make the
environment your servant. Its pressure is no longer pain but joy. The
concessions which life has made to time and space are the source of
life's glory and power.

The function of the nervous system is to carry from the environment to
the brain the impressions of truth, that action may be true and safe.
Pain and pleasure are both incidental to sound action. The one drives,
the other coaxes us toward the path of wisdom. If pain is in excess of
joy in our experience, it is because we have wandered from the path of
normal activity. By right-doing, we mean that action which makes for
"abundance of life," and abundance of life means fulness of joy. "Though
life be sad, yet there's joy in the living it" was the word of the
ancient Greeks, "who ever with a frolic welcome took the Thunder and the
Sunshine."

The life of man is dynamic, not static; not a condition but a movement.
"Not enjoyment and not sorrow" is its end or justification. It is a rush
of forces, an evolution towards greater activities and higher
adjustment, the growth of a stability which shall be ever more unstable.
This onward motion is recognized in the pessimistic philosophy of Von
Hartmann, as a movement towards ever greater possibilities of pain. With
him life is "the supreme blunder of the blind unconscious force" which
created man and developed him as the prey of ever-increasing suffering.

But the power to enjoy has grown in like degree, and both joy and pain
are subordinated to the power to act. The human will, the power to do,
is the real end of the stress and struggle of the ages. However limited
its individual action, the will finds its place among the gigantic
factors in the evolution of life. It is not the present, but the
ultimate, which is truth. Not the unstable and temporary fact but the
boundless clashing forces which endlessly throw truths to the surface.

Another source of Pessimism is the reaction from unearned pleasures and
from spurious joys. It is the business of the senses to translate
realities, to tell the truth about us in terms of human experience.
Every real pleasure has its cost in some form of nervous activity. What
we get we must earn, if it is to be really ours. Long ago, in the
infancy of civilization, man learned that there were drugs in Nature,
cell products of the growth or transformation of "our brother organisms,
the plants," by whose agency pain was turned to pleasure. By the aid of
these outside influences he could clear "today of past regrets and
future fears," and strike out from the sad "calendar unborn tomorrow and
dead yesterday."

That the joys thus produced had no real objective existence, man was not
long in finding out, and it soon appeared that for each subjective
pleasure which had no foundation in action, there was a subjective
sorrow, likewise unrelated to external things.

But that the pains more than balanced the joys, and that the indulgence
in unearned deceptions destroyed sooner or later all capacity for
enjoyment, man learned more slowly.

The joys of wine, of opium, of tobacco and of all kindred drugs are mere
tricks upon the nervous system. In greater or less degree they destroy
its power to tell the truth, and in proportion as they have seemed to
bring subjective happiness, so do they bring at last subjective horror
and disgust. And this utter soul-weariness of drugs has found its way
into literature as the expression of Pessimism.

"The City of the Dreadful Night," for example, does not find its
inspiration in the misery of selfish, rushing, crowded London. It is the
effect of brandy on the sensitive mind of an exquisitive poet. Not the
world, but the poet, lies in the "dreadful night" of self-inflicted
insomnia. Wherever these subjective nerve influences find expression in
literature it is either in an infinite sadness, or in hopeless gloom.
James Thompson says in the "City of the Dreadful Night":

  "The city is of night but not of sleep;
  There sweet sleep is not for the weary brain.
  The pitiless hours like years and ages creep--
  A night seems termless hell. This dreadful strain
  Of thought and consciousness which never ceases,
  Or which some moment's stupor but increases."

  * * *

  "This Time which crawleth like a monstrous snake,
  Wounded and slow and very venomous."

  * * *

  'Lo, as thus prostrate in the dust I write
  My heart's deep languor and my soul's sad tears--
  But why evoke the spectres of black night
  To blot the sunshine of exultant years!

  "Because a cold rage seizes one at times
  To show the bitter, old and wrinkled truth,
  Stripped naked of all vesture that beguiles
  False dreams, false hopes, false masks and modes of youth."

All this, alas, is the inevitable physical outcome of the attempt to--

  "Divorce old, barren Reason from my house
  To take the daughter of the vine to spouse."

All subjective happiness due to nerve stimulation is of the nature of
mania. In proportion to its intensity is the certainty that it will be
followed by its subjective reaction, the "Nuit Blanche," the "dark brown
taste," by the experience of "the difference in the morning." The only
melancholy drugs can drive away is that which they themselves produce.
It is folly to use as a source of pleasure that which lessens activity
and vitiates life.

There are many other causes which induce depression of mind and disorder
of nerve. Where nerve decay is associated with genius and culture, we
shall find some phase of the philosophy of Pessimism. In fact,
cheerfulness is not primarily a result of right thinking, but rather the
expression of sound nerves and normal vegetative processes. Most of the
philosophy of despair, the longing to know the meaning of the
unattainable, vanishes with active out-of-door life and the consequent
flow of good health. Even a dose of quinine may convert to hopefulness
when both sermons and arguments fail.

For a degree of optimism is a necessary accompaniment of health. It is
as natural as animal heat, and is the mental reflex of it. Pessimism
arises from depression or irritation or failure of the nerves. It is a
symptom of lowered vitality expressed in terms of the mind.

There is a philosophical Pessimism, as I have already said, over and
above all merely physical conditions, and not dependent on them. But the
melancholy Jacques of our ordinary experience either uses some narcotic
or stimulant to excess, or else has trouble with his liver or kidneys.
"Liver complaint," says Zangwill, "is the Prometheus myth done into
modern English." Already historical criticism has shown that the Bloody
Assizes had its origin in disease of the bladder, and most forms of vice
and cruelty resolve themselves into decay of the nerves. It is natural
that degeneration should bring discouragement and disgust. But whatever
the causes of Pessimism, whether arising in speculative philosophy in
nervous disease or in personal failure, it can never be wrought into
sound and helpful life. To live effectively implies the belief that life
is worth living, and no one who leads a worthy life has ever for a
moment doubted this.

Such an expression as "worth living" has in fact no real meaning. To act
and to love are the twin functions of the human body and soul. To refuse
these functions is to make one's self incapable of them. It is in a
sense to die while the body is still alive. To refuse these functions is
to make misery out of existence, and a life of ennui is doubtless not
"worth living."

The philosophy of life is its working hypothesis of action. To hold that
all effort is futile, that all knowledge is illusion, and that no result
of the human will is worth the pain of calling it into action, is to cut
the nerve of effectiveness. In proportion as one really believes this,
he becomes a cumberer of the ground. It was said of Oscar McCulloch, an
earnest student of human life, that "in whatever part of God's universe
he finds himself, he will be a hopeful man, looking forward and not
backward, looking upward and not downward, always ready to lend a
helping hand, and not afraid to die."

Of like spirit was Robert Louis Stevenson:

  "Glad did I live and gladly die,
  And I laid me down with a will."

It is through men of this type that the work of civilization has been
accomplished, "men of present valor, stalwart, brave iconoclasts." They
were men who were content with the order of the universe as it is, and
seek only to place their own actions in harmony with this order. They
have no complaints to urge against "the goodness and severity of God,"
nor any futile wish "to remould it nearer to the heart's desire." The
"Fanaticism for Veracity" is satisfied with what is. Not the ultimate
truth which is God's alone, but the highest attainable truth, is the aim
of Science, and to translate Science into Virtue is the goal of
civilization.

The third question which Science may ask is the direct one. In what part
of the universe are you, and what are you doing? Thoreau says that
"there is no hope for you unless this bit of sod under your feet is the
sweetest to you in this world--in any world." Why not? Nowhere is the
sky so blue, the grass so green, the sunshine so bright, the shade so
welcome, as right here, now, today. No other blue sky, nor bright
sunshine, nor welcome shade exists for you. Other skies are bright to
other men. They have been bright in the past and so will they be again,
but yours are here and now. Today is your day and mine, the only day we
have, the day in which we play our part. What our part may signify in
the great whole we may not understand, but we are here to play it, and
now is the time. This we know, it is a part of action, not of whining.
It is a part of love, not cynicism. It is for us to express love in
terms of human helpfulness. This we know, for we have learned from sad
experience that any other course of life leads toward decay and waste.

What, then, are you doing under these blue skies? The thing you do
should be for you the most important thing in the world. If you could do
something better than you are doing now, everything considered, why are
you not doing it?

If every one did the very best he knew, most of the problems of human
life would be already settled. If each one did the best he knew, he
would be on the highway to greater knowledge, and therefore still better
action. The redemption of the world is waiting only for each man to
"lend a hand."

It does not matter if the greatest thing for you to do be not in itself
great. The best preparation for greatness comes in doing faithfully the
little things that lie nearest. The nearest is the greatest in most
human lives.

Even washing one's own face may be the greatest present duty. The
ascetics of the past, who scorned cleanliness in the search for
godliness, became, sometimes, neither clean nor holy. For want of a
clean face they lost their souls.

It was Agassiz's strength that he knew the value of today. Never were
such bright skies as arched above him; nowhere else were such charming
associates, such budding students, such secrets of nature fresh to his
hand. His was the buoyant strength of the man who can look the stars in
the face because he does his part in the Universe as well as they do
theirs. It is the fresh, unspoiled confidence of the natural man, who
finds the world a world of action and joy, and time all too short for
the fulness of life which it demands. When Agassiz died, "the best
friend that ever student had," the students of Harvard "laid a wreath of
laurel on his bier, and their manly voices sang a requiem, for he had
been a student all his life long, and when he died he was younger than
any of them."

Optimism in life is a good working hypothesis, if by optimism we mean
the open-eyed faith that force exerted is never lost. Much that calls
itself faith is only the blindness of self-satisfaction.

What if there are so many of us in the ranks of humanity? What if the
individual be lost in the mass as a pebble cast into the Seven Seas?
Would you choose a world so small as to leave room for only you and your
satellites? Would you ask for problems of life so tame that even you
could grasp them? Would you choose a fibreless Universe to be "remoulded
nearer to the heart's desire," in place of the wild, tough, virile,
man-making environment from which the Attraction of Gravitation lets
none of us escape?

It is not that "I come like water and like wind I go." I am here today,
and the moment and the place are real, and my will is itself one of the
fates that make and unmake all things. "Every meanest day is the
conflux of two eternities," and in this center of all time and space for
the moment it is I that stand. Great is Eternity, but it is made up of
time. Could we blot out one day in the midst of time, Eternity could be
no more. The feebleness of man has its place within the infinite
Omnipotence.

It is a question not of hope or despair, but of truth, not of optimism
nor of Pessimism, but of wisdom. Wisdom is knowing what to do next;
virtue is doing it. Religion is the heart impulse that turns toward the
best and highest course of action. "It was my duty to have loved the
highest. What does that demand? What have I to do next? Not in infinity,
where we can do nothing, but here, today, the greatest day that ever
was, for it alone is mine!

What matter is it that time does not end with us? Neither with us does
history begin. An Emperor of China once decreed that nothing should be
before him, that all history should begin with him. But he could go no
farther than his own decree. Who are you that would be Emperor of China?

  "The eternal Saki from that bowl hath poured
  Millions of bubbles like us and shall pour."

Why not? Should life stop with you? What have you done that you should
mark the end of time? If you have played your part in the procession of
bubbles, all is well, though the best you can do is to leave the world a
little better for the next that follows.

If you have not made life a little richer and its conditions a little
more just by your living you have not touched the world. You are indeed
a bubble. If some kind friend somewhere "turn down an empty glass," it
will be the best monument you deserve. But to have had a friend is to
leave the glass not wholly empty, for life is justified in love as well
as in action.

The words of Omar need to be read with the rising inflection, and they
become the expression of exultant hopefulness.

  "The eternal Saki from that bowl hath poured
  Millions of bubbles and shall pour!"

Small though we are the story is not all told when we are dead. The huge
procession goes on and shall go on, till the secret of the grand
symphony of life is reached.

  "A single note in the Eternal Song
  A perfect Singer hath had need for me."

  * * *

  "I do rejoice that when of Thee and Me
  Men speak no longer, yet not less but more
  The Eternal Saki still that bowl shall fill
  And ever fairer, clearer bubbles pour."

In the same way we must read with the rising inflection the lines of
Tennyson:

  "I falter when I firmly trod,
  And falling with my weight of cares,
  Upon the World's great altar-stairs
  That slope through darkness, up to god!"

Read these words with courage, and with the upward turn of the voice at
the end. It is no longer in the darkness that we falter. The great
altar-stairs of which no man knows the beginning nor the end, do not
spring from the mire nor end in the mists. They "slope through darkness
up to God," and no one could ask a stronger expression of that robust
optimism which must be the mainspring of successful life.

--------------------

I. REASON OF INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.—It is desirable that at some stage in
the course of his investigations the student of philosophy should be
invited to take a brief general survey of the work in which he is engaged.
This purpose will be served by a chapter on _the general aim and scope of
philosophy_, its distinctive characteristics as compared with other lines
of human thought, and its relations to these latter. Such considerations
will at the same time help to define _Ontology_, thus introducing the
reader to the subject-matter of the present volume.

II. PHILOSOPHY: THE NAME AND THE THING.—In the fifth book of Cicero’s
_Tusculan Disputations_ we read that the terms _philosophus_ and
_philosophia_ were first employed by Pythagoras who flourished in the
sixth century before Christ, that this ancient sage was modest enough to
call himself not a “wise man” but a “lover of wisdom” (φίλος, σοφία), and
his calling not a profession of wisdom but a search for wisdom. However,
despite the disclaimer, the term _philosophy_ soon came to signify
_wisdom_ simply, meaning by this the highest and most precious kind of
knowledge.

Now human knowledge has for its object everything that falls in any way
within human experience. It has _extensively_ a great variety in its
subject-matter, and _intensively_ a great variety in its degrees of depth
and clearness and perfection. _Individual facts_ of the past, communicated
by human testimony, form the raw materials of _historical_ knowledge. Then
there are all the individual things and events that fall within one’s own
personal experience. Moreover, by the study of human language (or
languages), of works of the human mind and products of human genius and
skill, we gain a knowledge of _literature_, and of the _arts_—the fine
arts and the mechanical arts. But not merely do we use our senses and
memory thus to accumulate an unassorted stock of informations about
isolated facts: a miscellaneous mass of mental furniture which constitutes
the bulk of human knowledge in its _least developed_ form—_cognitio
____vulgaris,___ the knowledge of the comparatively uneducated and
unreflecting classes of mankind. We also use our reasoning faculty to
reflect, compare, classify these informations, to interpret them, to
reason about them, to infer from them _general truths_ that embrace
individual things and events _beyond our personal experience_; we try to
explain them by seeking out their _reasons_ and _causes_. This mental
activity gradually converts our knowledge into _scientific_ knowledge, and
thus gives rise to those great groups of systematized truths called the
_sciences_: as, for example, the physical and mathematical sciences, the
elements of which usually form part of our early education. These sciences
teach us a great deal about ourselves and the universe in which we live.
There is no need to dwell on the precious services conferred upon mankind
by discoveries due to the progress of the various _special_ sciences:
mathematics as applied to engineering of all sorts; astronomy; the
physical sciences of light, heat, sound, electricity, magnetism, etc.;
chemistry in all its branches; physiology and anatomy as applied in
medicine and surgery. All these undoubtedly contribute much to man’s
_bodily_ well-being. But man has a _mind_ as well as a body, and he is
moreover a _social_ being: there are, therefore, other special
sciences—“human” as distinct from “physical” sciences—in which man himself
is studied in his mental activities and social relations with his
fellow-men: the sciences of social and political economy, constitutional
and civil law, government, statesmanship, etc. Furthermore, man is a
_moral_ being, recognizing distinctions of good and bad, right and wrong,
pleasure and happiness, duty and responsibility, in his own conduct; and
finally he is a _religious_ being, face to face with the fact that men
universally entertain views, beliefs, convictions of some sort or other,
regarding man’s subjection to, and dependence on, some higher power or
powers dwelling somehow or somewhere within or above the whole universe of
his direct and immediate experience: there are therefore also sciences
which deal with these domains, morality and religion. Here, however, the
domains are so extensive, and the problems raised by their phenomena are
of such far-reaching importance, that the sciences which deal with them
can hardly be called special sciences, but rather constituent portions of
the one wider and deeper _general_ science which is what men commonly
understand nowadays by philosophy.

The distinction between the special sciences on the one hand and
philosophy, the general science, on the other, will help us to realize
more clearly the nature and scope of the latter. The special sciences are
concerned with discovering the _proximate_ reasons and causes of this,
that, and the other definite department in the whole universe of our
experience. The subject-matter of some of them is totally different from
that of others: physiology studies the functions of living organisms;
geology studies the formation of the earth’s crust. Or if two or more of
them investigate the same subject-matter they do so from different
standpoints, as when the zoologist and the physiologist study the same
type or specimen in the animal kingdom. But the common feature of all is
this, that each seeks only the reasons, causes, and laws which give a
_proximate_ and _partial_ explanation of the facts which it investigates,
leaving untouched and unsolved a number of deeper and wider questions
which may be raised about the _whence_ and _whither_ and _why_, not only
of the facts themselves, but of the reasons, causes and laws assigned by
the particular science in explanation of these facts.

Now it is those deeper and wider questions, which can be answered only by
the discovery of the _more remote_ and _ultimate_ reasons and causes of
things, that philosophy undertakes to investigate, and—as far as lies
within man’s power—to answer. No one has ever disputed the supreme
importance of such inquiries into the ultimate reasons and causes of
things—into such questions as these, for instance: What is the nature of
man himself? Has he in him a principle of life which is spiritual and
immortal? What was his first origin on the earth? Whence did he come? Has
his existence any purpose, and if so, what? Whither does he tend? What is
his destiny? Why does he distinguish between a right and a wrong in human
conduct? What is the ultimate reason or ground of this distinction? Why
have men generally some form or other of religion? Why do men generally
believe in God? Is there really a God? What is the origin of the whole
universe of man’s experience? Of life in all its manifestations? Has the
universe any intelligible or intelligent purpose, and if so, what? Can the
human mind give a certain answer to any of these or similar questions?
What about the nature and value of human _knowledge_ itself? What is its
scope and what are its limitations? And since vast multitudes of men
_believe_ that the human race has been specially enlightened by God
Himself, by Divine Revelation, to know for certain what man’s destiny is,
and is specially aided by God Himself, by Divine Grace, to work out this
destiny—the question immediately arises: What are the real relations
between reason alone on the one hand and reason enlightened by such
Revelation on the other, in other words between natural knowledge and
supernatural faith?

Now it will be admitted that the special sciences take us some distance
along the road towards an answer to such questions, inasmuch as the truths
established by these sciences, and even the wider hypotheses conceived
though not strictly verified in them, furnish us with most valuable data
in our investigation of those questions. Similarly the alleged fact of a
Divine Revelation cannot be ignored by any man desirous of using all the
data available as helps towards their solution. The Revelation embodied in
Christianity claims not merely to enlighten us in regard to many ultimate
questions which mankind would be able to answer without its assistance,
but also to tell us about our destiny some truths of supreme import, which
of ourselves we should never have been able to discover. It is obvious,
then, that whether a man has been brought up from his infancy to believe
in the Christian Revelation or not, his whole outlook on life will be
determined very largely by his belief or disbelief in its authenticity and
its contents. Similarly, if he be a Confucian, or a Buddhist, or a
Mohammedan, his outlook will be in part determined by what he believes of
their teachings. Man’s conduct in life has undoubtedly many determining
influences, but it will hardly be denied that among them the predominant
influence is exerted by the views that he holds, the things he believes to
be true, concerning his own origin, nature and destiny, as well as the
origin, nature and destiny of the universe in which he finds himself. The
Germans have an expressive term for that which, in the absence of a more
appropriate term, we may translate as a man’s _world-outlook_; they call
it his _Weltanschauung_. Now this world-outlook is formed by each
individual for himself from his interpretation of _his experience as a
whole_. It is not unusual to call this world-outlook a man’s _philosophy
of life_. If we use the term _philosophy_ in this wide sense it obviously
includes whatever light a man may gather from the _special sciences_, and
whatever light he may gather from a divinely revealed _religion_ if he
believes in such, as well as the light his own reason may shed upon a
special and direct study of those ultimate questions themselves, to which
we have just referred. But we mention this wide sense of the term
_philosophy_ merely to put it aside; and to state that we use the term in
the sense more commonly accepted nowadays, the sense in which it is
understood to be distinct from the _special sciences_ on the one side and
from _supernatural theology_ or the systematic study of divinely revealed
religion on the other. Philosophy is distinct from the special sciences
because while the latter seek the proximate, the former seeks the ultimate
grounds, reasons and causes of all the facts of human experience.
Philosophy is distinct from supernatural theology because while the former
uses _the unaided power of human reason_ to study the ultimate questions
raised by human experience, the latter uses _reason enlightened by Divine
Revelation_ to study the contents of this Revelation in all their bearings
on man’s life and destiny.

Hence we arrive at this simple and widely accepted definition of
philosophy: _the science of all things through their ultimate reasons and
causes as discovered by the unaided light of human reason_.( ) The first
part of this definition marks off philosophy from the special sciences,
the second part marks it off from supernatural theology.


    We must remember, however, that these three departments of
    knowledge—scientific, philosophical, and revealed—are not isolated
    from one another in any man’s mind; they overlap in their
    subject-matter, and though differing in their respective
    standpoints they permeate one another through and through. The
    separation of the special sciences from philosophy, though
    adumbrated in the speculations of ancient times and made more
    definite in the middle ages, was completed only in modern times
    through the growth and progress of the special sciences
    themselves. The line of demarcation between philosophy and
    supernatural theology must be determined by the proper relations
    between Reason and Faith: and naturally these relations are a
    subject of debate between philosophers who believe in the
    existence of an authentic Divine Revelation and philosophers who
    do not. It is the duty of the philosopher as such to determine by
    the light of reason whether a Supreme Being exists and whether a
    Divine Revelation to man is possible. If he convinces himself of
    the existence of God he will have little difficulty in inferring
    the _possibility_ of a Divine Revelation. The _fact_ of a Divine
    Revelation is a matter not for philosophical but for historical
    research. Now when a man has convinced himself of the existence of
    God and the fact of a Divine Revelation—the _preambula fidei_ or
    prerequisite conditions of Faith, as they are called—he must see
    that it is eminently reasonable for him to believe in the contents
    of such Divine Revelation; he must see that the truths revealed by
    God cannot possibly trammel the freedom of his own reason in its
    philosophical inquiries into ultimate problems concerning man and
    the universe; he must see that these truths may possibly act as
    beacons which will keep him from going astray in his own
    investigations: knowing that truth cannot contradict truth he
    knows that if he reaches a conclusion really incompatible with any
    certainly revealed truth, such conclusion must be erroneous; and
    so he is obliged to reconsider the reasoning processes that led
    him to such a conclusion.( ) Thus, the position of the Christian
    philosopher, aided in this negative way by the truths of an
    authentic Divine Revelation, has a distinct advantage over that of
    the philosopher who does not believe in such revelation and who
    tries to solve all ultimate questions independently of any light
    such revelation may shed upon them. Yet the latter philosopher as
    a rule not only regards the “independent” position, which he
    himself takes up in the name of “freedom of thought” and “freedom
    of research,” as the superior position, but as the only one
    consistent with the dignity of human reason; and he commonly
    accuses the Christian philosopher of allowing reason to be
    “enslaved” in “the shackles of dogma”. We can see at once the
    unfairness of such a charge when we remember that the Christian
    philosopher has convinced himself _on grounds of reason alone_
    that God exists and has made a revelation to man. His belief in a
    Divine Revelation is a _reasoned_ belief, a _rationabile
    obsequium_ (Rom. XII.  ); and only if it were a blind belief,
    unjustifiable on grounds of reason, would the accusation referred
    to be a fair one. The Christian philosopher might retort that it
    is the unbelieving philosopher himself who really destroys
    “freedom of thought and research,” by claiming for the latter what
    is really an abuse of freedom, namely _license_ to believe what
    reason shows to be erroneous. But this counter-charge would be
    equally unfair, for the unbelieving philosopher does not claim any
    such undue license to believe what he knows to be false or to
    disbelieve what he knows to be true. If he denies the fact or the
    possibility of a Divine Revelation, and therefore pursues his
    philosophical investigations without any regard to the contents of
    such revelation, it is because he has convinced himself on grounds
    of reason that such revelation is neither a fact nor a
    possibility. He and the Christian philosopher cannot both be
    right; one of them must be wrong; but as reasonable men they
    should agree to differ rather than hurl unjustifiable charges and
    counter-charges at each other.

    All philosophers who believe in the Christian Revelation and allow
    its authentic teachings to guide and supplement their own rational
    investigation into ultimate questions, are keenly conscious of the
    consequent superior depth and fulness and certitude of Christian
    philosophy as compared with all the other conflicting and
    fragmentary philosophies that mark the progress of human
    speculation on the ultimate problems of man and the universe down
    through the centuries. They feel secure in the possession of a
    _philosophia __ perennis_,( ) and none more secure than those of
    them who complete and confirm that philosophy by the only full and
    authentic deposit of Divinely Revealed Truth, which is to be found
    in the teaching of the Catholic Church.


The history of philosophical investigation yields no one universally
received conception of what philosophy is, nor would the definition given
above be unreservedly accepted. Windelband, in his _History of
Philosophy_( ) instances the following predominant conceptions of
philosophy according to the chronological order in which they prevailed:
(_a_) the systematic investigation of the problems raised by man and the
universe (early Grecian philosophy: absence of differentiation of
philosophy from the special sciences); (_b_) the practical art of human
conduct, based on rational speculation (later Grecian philosophy: distrust
in the value of knowledge, and emphasis on practical guidance of conduct);
(_c_) the helper and handmaid of the Science of Revealed Truth, _i.e._
supernatural theology, in the solution of ultimate problems (the Christian
philosophy of the Fathers of the Church and of the Medieval Schools down
to the sixteenth century: universal recognition of the value of the
Christian Revelation as an aid to rational investigation); (_d_) a purely
rational investigation of those problems, going beyond the investigations
of the special sciences, and either abstracting from, or denying the value
of, any light or aid from Revelation (differentiation of the domains of
science, philosophy and theology; modern philosophies from the sixteenth
to the nineteenth century; excessive individualism and rationalism of
these as unnaturally divorced from recognition of, and belief in, Divine
Revelation, and unduly isolated from the progressing positive sciences);
(_e_) a critical analysis of the significance and scope and limitations of
human knowledge itself (recent philosophies, mainly concerned with
theories of knowledge and speculations on the nature of the cognitive
process and the reliability of its products).

These various conceptions are interesting and suggestive; much might be
said about them, but not to any useful purpose in a brief introductory
chapter. Let us rather, adopting the definition already set forth, try
next to map out into its leading departments the whole philosophical
domain.

III. DIVISIONS OF PHILOSOPHY: SPECULATIVE AND PRACTICAL PHILOSOPHY.—The
general problem of classifying all the sciences built up by human thought
is a logical problem of no little complexity when one tries to work it out
in detail. We refer to this general problem only to mention a widely
accepted principle on which it is usually approached, and because the
division of philosophy itself is a section of the general problem. The
principle in question is that sciences may be distinguished indeed by
partial or total _diversity of subject-matter_, but that such diversity is
not essential, that _diversity of standpoint_ is necessary and sufficient
to constitute distinct sciences even when these deal with one and the same
subject-matter. Now applying this principle to philosophy we see firstly
that it has the same subject-matter as all the special sciences taken
collectively, but that it is distinct from all of them inasmuch as it
studies their data not from the standpoint of the proximate causes, but
from the higher standpoint of the ultimate causes of these data. And we
see secondly that philosophy, having this one higher standpoint throughout
all its departments, is _one_ science; that its divisions are only
material divisions; that there is not a plurality of philosophies as there
is a plurality of sciences, though there is a plurality of departments in
philosophy.( ) Let us now see what these departments are.

If we ask why people seek knowledge at all, in any department, we shall
detect two main impelling motives. The first of these is simply the desire
to know: _trahimur omnes cupiditate sciendi_. The natural feeling of
wonder, astonishment, “_admiratio_,” which accompanies our perception of
things and events, prompts us to seek their causes, to discover the
reasons which will make them _intelligible_ to us and enable us to
_understand_ them. But while the possession of knowledge for its own sake
is thus a motive of research it is not the only motive. We seek knowledge
_in order to use it_ for the guidance of our conduct in life, for the
orientation of our activities, for the improvement of our condition;
knowing that knowledge is power, we seek it in order to make it minister
to our needs. Now in the degree in which it fulfils such ulterior
purposes, or is sought for these purposes, knowledge may be described as
_practical_; in the degree in which it serves no ulterior end, or is
sought for no ulterior end, other than that of perfecting our minds, it
may be described as _speculative_. Of course this latter purpose is in
itself a highly practical purpose; nor indeed is there any knowledge,
however speculative, but has, or at least is capable of having, some
influence or bearing on the actual tenor and conduct of our lives; and in
this sense all knowledge is practical. Still we can distinguish broadly
between knowledge which has no direct, immediate bearing on our acts, and
knowledge that has.( ) Hence the possibility of distinguishing between
two great domains of philosophical knowledge—_Theoretical_ or _Speculative
Philosophy_, and _Practical Philosophy_. There are, in fact, two great
domains into which the data of all human experience may be divided; and
for each distinct domain submitted to philosophical investigation there
will be a distinct department of philosophy. A first domain is the order
_realized_ in the universe independently of man; a second is the order
which man himself _realizes_: _things_, therefore, and _acts_. The order
of the external universe, the order of nature as it is called, exists
independently of us: we merely study it (_speculari_, θεωρέω), we do not
create it. The other or _practical_ order is established by our acts of
_intelligence_ and _will_, and by our _bodily action_ on external things
under the direction of those faculties in the arts. Hence we have a
_speculative_ or _theoretical_ philosophy and a _practical_
philosophy.( )

IV. DEPARTMENTS OF PRACTICAL PHILOSOPHY: LOGIC, ETHICS AND ESTHETICS.—In
the domain of human activities, to the right regulation of which practical
philosophy is directed, we may distinguish two departments of mental
activity, namely _intellectual_ and _volitional_, and besides these the
whole department of _external_, executive or bodily activity. In general
the right regulation of acts may be said to consist in directing them to
the realization of some ideal; for all cognitive acts this ideal is the
_true_, for all appetitive or volitional acts it is the _good_, while for
all external operations it may be either the _beautiful_ or the
_useful_—the respective objects of the fine arts and the mechanical arts
or crafts.

_Logic_, as a practical science, studies the mental acts and processes
involved in discovering and proving truths and systematizing these into
sciences, with a view to directing these acts and processes aright in the
accomplishment of this complex task. Hence it has for its subject-matter,
in a certain sense, _all_ the data of human experience, or whatever can be
an object of human thought. But it studies these data not directly or in
themselves or for their own sake, but only in so far as our acts of
reason, which form its direct object, are brought to bear upon them. In
all the other sciences we employ thought to study the various objects of
thought as things, events, realities; and hence these may be called “real”
sciences, _scientiae reales_; while in Logic we study thought itself, and
even here not speculatively for its own sake or as a reality (as we study
it for instance in Psychology), but practically, as a process capable of
being directed towards the discovery and proof of truth; and hence in
contradistinction to the other sciences as “real,” we call Logic _the_
“rational” science, _scientia rationalis_. Scholastic philosophers express
this distinction by saying that while Speculative Philosophy studies
_real_ being (_Ens Reale_), or the objects of direct thought (_objecta
primae intentionis mentis_), Logic studies the being which is the _product
of thought_ (_Ens Rationis_), or objects of reflex thought (_objecta
secundae intentionis mentis_).( ) The mental processes involved in the
attainment of scientific truth are conception, judgment and inference;
moreover these processes have to be exercised methodically by the combined
application of analysis and synthesis, or induction and deduction, to the
various domains of human experience. All these processes, therefore, and
the methods of their application, constitute the proper subject-matter of
Logic. It has been more or less a matter of debate since the days of
Aristotle whether Logic should be regarded as a department of
philosophical science proper, or rather as a preparatory discipline, an
instrument or _organon_ of reasoning—as the collection of Aristotle’s own
logical treatises was called,—and so as a vestibule or introduction to
philosophy. And there is a similar difference of opinion as to whether or
not it is advisable to set down Logic as the first department to be
studied in the philosophical curriculum. Such doubts arise from
differences of view as to the questions to be investigated in Logic, and
the point to which such investigations should be carried therein. It is
possible to distinguish between a more elementary treatment of
thought-processes with the avowedly practical aim of setting forth canons
of inference and method which would help and train the mind to reason and
investigate correctly; and a more philosophical treatment of those
processes with the speculative aim of determining their ultimate
significance and validity as factors of knowledge, as attaining to truth,
as productive of science and certitude. It is only the former field of
investigation that is usually accorded to Logic nowadays; and thus
understood Logic ought to come first in the curriculum as a preparatory
training for philosophical studies, accompanied, however, by certain
elementary truths from Psychology regarding the nature and functions of
the human mind. The other domain of deeper and more speculative
investigation was formerly explored in what was regarded as a second
portion of logical science, under the title of “Critical” Logic—_Logica
Critica_. In modern times this is regarded as a distinct department of
Speculative Philosophy, under the various titles of _Epistemology_,
_Criteriology_, or the _Theory of Knowledge_.

_Ethics or Moral Philosophy_ (ἤθος, _mos_, _mores_, morals, conduct) is
that department of practical philosophy which has for its subject-matter
all human acts, _i.e._ all acts elicited or commanded by the will of man
considered as a free, rational and responsible agent. And it studies human
conduct with the practical purpose of discovering the ultimate end or
object of this conduct, and the principles whereby it must be regulated in
order to attain to this end. Ethics must therefore analyse and account for
the distinction of _right_ and _wrong_ or _good_ and _bad_ in human
conduct, for its feature of _morality_. It must examine the motives that
influence conduct: pleasure, well-being, happiness, duty, obligation,
moral law, etc. The supreme determining factor in all such considerations
will obviously be _the ultimate end of man_, whatever this may be: his
destiny as revealed by a study of his nature and place in the universe.
Now the nature of man is studied in Psychology, as are also the nature,
conditions and effects of his free acts, and the facilities, dispositions
and forms of character consequent on these. Furthermore, not only from the
study of man in Psychology, but from the study of the external universe in
Cosmology, we amass data from which in Natural Theology we establish the
existence of a Supreme Being. We then prove in Ethics that the last end of
man, his highest perfection, consists in knowing, loving, serving, and
thus glorifying God, both in this life and in the next. Hence we can see
how these branches of speculative philosophy subserve the practical
science of morals. And since a man’s interpretation of the moral
distinctions—as of right or wrong, meritorious or blameworthy, autonomous
or of obligation—which he recognizes as pertaining to his own
actions—since his interpretation of these distinctions is so intimately
bound up with his religious outlook and beliefs, it is at once apparent
that the science of Ethics will be largely influenced and determined by
the system of speculative philosophy which inspires it, whether this be
Theism, Monism, Agnosticism, etc. No doubt the science of Ethics must take
as its data all sorts of moral beliefs, customs and practices prevalent at
any time among men; but it is not a speculative science which would merely
aim at _a posteriori_ inferences or inductive generalizations from these
data; it is a practical, _normative_ science which aims at discovering the
truth as to what is the right and the wrong in human conduct, and at
pointing out the right application of the principles arising out of this
truth. Hence it is of supreme importance for the philosopher of morals to
determine whether the human race has really been vouchsafed a Divine
Revelation, and, convincing himself that Christianity contains such a
revelation, to recognize the possibility of supplementing and perfecting
what his own natural reason can discover by what the Christian religion
teaches about the end of man as the supreme determining principle of human
conduct. Not that he is to take the revealed truths of Christianity as
principles of moral _philosophy_; for these are the principles of the
_supernatural __ Christian Theology_ of human morals; but that as a
Christian philosopher, _i.e._ a philosopher who recognizes the truth of
the Christian Revelation, he should reason out philosophically a science
of Ethics which, so far as it goes, will be in harmony with the moral
teachings of the Christian Religion, and will admit of being perfected by
these. This recognition, as already remarked, will not be a hindrance but
a help to him in exploring the wide domains of the individual, domestic,
social and religious conduct of man; in determining, on the basis of
theism established by natural reason, the right moral conditions and
relations of man’s conduct as an individual, as a member of the family, as
a member of the state, and as a creature of God. The nature, source and
sanction of authority, domestic, social and religious; of the dictate of
conscience; of the natural moral law and of all positive law; of the moral
virtues and vices—these are all questions which the philosopher of Ethics
has to explore by the use of natural reason, and for the investigation of
which the Christian philosopher of Ethics is incomparably better equipped
than the philosopher who, though possessing the compass of natural reason,
ignores the beacon lights of Divinely Revealed Truths.

_Esthetics_, or the _Philosophy of the Fine Arts_, is that department of
philosophy which studies the conception of the _beautiful_ and its
external expression in the works of nature and of man. The arts
themselves, of course, whether concerned with the realization of the
useful or of the beautiful, are distinct from sciences, even from
practical sciences.( ) The _technique_ itself consists in a skill
acquired by practice—by practice guided, however, by a set of practical
canons or rules which are the ripe fruit of experience.( ) But behind
every art there is always some background of more or less speculative
truth. The conception of the _useful_, however which underlies the
mechanical arts and crafts, is not an ultimate conception calling for any
further analysis than it receives in the various special sciences and in
metaphysics. But the conception of the _beautiful_ does seem to demand a
special philosophical consideration. On the subjective or mental side the
esthetic sense, artistic taste, the sentiment of the beautiful, the
complex emotions accompanying such experience; on the objective side the
elements or factors requisite to produce this experience; the relation of
the esthetic to the moral, of the beautiful to the good and the true—these
are all distinctly philosophical questions. Up to the present time,
however, their treatment has been divided between the other departments of
philosophy—psychology, cosmology, natural theology, general metaphysics,
ethics—rather than grouped together to form an additional distinct
department.

V. DEPARTMENTS OF SPECULATIVE PHILOSOPHY: METAPHYSICS.—The philosophy
which studies the order realized in things apart from our activity,
speculative philosophy, has been variously divided up into separate
departments from the first origins of philosophical speculation.

When we remember that all intellectual knowledge of things involves the
apprehension of _general_ truths or laws about these things, and that this
apprehension of intelligible aspects common to a more or less extensive
group of things involves the exercise of _abstraction_, we can understand
how the whole domain of speculative knowledge, whether scientific or
philosophical, can be differentiated into certain layers or levels, so to
speak, according to various degrees of abstractness and universality in
the intelligible aspects under which the data of our experience may be
considered. On this principle Aristotle and the scholastics divided all
speculative knowledge into three great domains, _Physics_, _Mathematics_
and _Metaphysics_, with their respective proper objects, _Change_,
_Quantity_ and _Being_, objects which are successively apprehended in
three great stages of abstraction traversed by the human mind in its
effort to understand and explain the Universal Order of things.

And as a matter of fact perhaps the first great common and most obvious
feature which strikes the mind reflecting on the visible universe is the
feature of all-pervading change (κίνησις), movement, evolution, progress
and regress, growth and decay; we see it everywhere in a variety of forms,
mechanical or local change, quantitative change, qualitative change, vital
change. Now the knowledge acquired by the study of things under this
common aspect is called _Physics_. Here the mind abstracts merely from the
individualizing differences of this change in individual things, and fixes
its attention on the great, common, sensible aspect itself of visible
change.

But the mind can abstract even from the sensible changes that take place
in the physical universe and fix its attention on a _static_ feature in
the changing things. This static element (τὸ ἀκίνητον), which the
intellect apprehends in _material_ things as naturally inseparable from
them (ἀκίνητον ἀλλ᾽ οὐ χωριστόν), is their _quantity_, their extension in
space. When the mind strips a material object of all its visible, sensible
properties—on which its mechanical, physical and chemical changes
depend—there still remains as an object of thought a something formed of
parts outside parts in three dimensions of space. This _abstract_
quantity, _quantitas intelligibilis_—whether as continuous or
discontinuous, as _magnitude_ or _multitude_—is the proper object of
_Mathematics_.

But the mind can penetrate farther still into the reality of the material
data which it finds endowed with the attributes of change and quantity: it
can eliminate from the object of its thought even this latter or
mathematical attribute, and seize on something still more fundamental. The
very essence, substance, nature, being itself, of the thing, the
underlying subject and root principle of all the thing’s operations and
attributes, is something deeper than any of these attributes, something at
least mentally distinct from these latter (τὸ ἀκίνητον και χωριστόν): and
this something is the proper object of man’s highest speculative
knowledge, which Aristotle called ἡ πρώτη φιλοσοφία, _philosophia prima_,
the _first_ or _fundamental_ or _deepest_ philosophy.( )

But he gave this latter order of knowledge another very significant title:
he called it _theology_ or _theological science_, ἐπιστήμη θεολογίκή, by a
denomination derived _a potiori parte_, from its nobler part, its
culmination in the knowledge of God. Let us see how. For Aristotle _first
philosophy_ is the science of _being and its essential attributes_.( )
Here the mind apprehends its object as _static_ or abstracted from change,
and as _immaterial_ or abstracted from quantity, the fundamental attribute
of material reality—as ἀκίνητον καὶ χωριστόν. Now it is the substance,
nature, or essence of _the things of our direct and immediate experience_,
that forms the proper object of this highest science. But in these things
the substance, nature, or essence, is not found in _real and actual_
separation from the material attributes of change and quantity; it is
_considered_ separately from these only by an effort of mental
abstraction. Even the nature of man himself is not wholly immaterial; nor
is the spiritual principle in man, his soul, entirely exempt from material
conditions. Hence in so far as first philosophy studies the being of the
things of our direct experience, its object is immaterial only
_negatively_ or _by mental abstraction_. But does this study bring within
the scope of our experience any being or reality that is _positively and
actually_ exempt from all change and all material conditions? If so the
study of this being, the Divine Being, will be the highest effort, the
crowning perfection, of _first philosophy_; which we may therefore call
the _theological_ science. “If,” writes Aristotle,( ) “there really
exists a substance absolutely immutable and immaterial, in a word, a
Divine Being—as we hope to prove—then such Being must be the absolutely
first and supreme principle, and the science that attains to such Being
will be theological.”

In this triple division of speculative philosophy into Physics,
Mathematics, and Metaphysics, it will naturally occur to one to ask: Did
Aristotle distinguish between what he called Physics and what we nowadays
call the special physical sciences? He did. These special _analytic_
studies of the various departments of the physical universe, animate and
inanimate, Aristotle described indiscriminately as “partial” sciences: αἱ
ἐν μέρει ἐπιστημάι—ἐπιστημαὶ ἐν μέρει λεγόμεναι. These descriptive,
inductive, comparative studies, proceeding _a posteriori_ from effects to
causes, he conceived rather as a preparation for scientific knowledge
proper; this latter he conceived to be a _synthetic_, deductive
explanation of things, in the light of some common aspect detected in them
as principle or cause of all their concrete characteristics.( ) Such
synthetic knowledge of things, in the light of some such common aspect as
change, is what he regarded as scientific knowledge, meaning thereby what
we mean by philosophical knowledge.( ) What he called _Physics_,
therefore, is what we nowadays understand as _Cosmology_ and
_Psychology_.( )

Mathematical science Aristotle likewise regarded as science in the full
and perfect sense, _i.e._ as philosophical. But just as we distinguish
nowadays between the special physical and human sciences on the one hand,
and the philosophy of external nature and man on the other, so we may
distinguish between the special mathematical sciences and a Philosophy of
Mathematics: with this difference, that while the former groups of special
sciences are mainly inductive the mathematical group is mainly deductive.
Furthermore, the Philosophy of Mathematics—which investigates questions
regarding the ultimate significance of mathematical concepts, axioms and
assumptions: unity, multitude, magnitude, quantity, space, time, etc.—does
not usually form a separate department in the philosophical curriculum:
its problems are dealt with as they arise in the other departments of
Metaphysics.

Before outlining the modern divisions of Metaphysics we may note that this
latter term was not used by Aristotle. We owe it probably to Andronicus of
Rhodes (†   B.C.), who, when arranging a complete edition of Aristotle’s
works, placed next in order after the _Physics_, or physical treatises,
all the parts and fragments of the master’s works bearing upon the
immutable and immaterial object of the _philosophia prima_; these he
labelled τὰ μετὰ τὰ (βιβλία) φυσικα, _post physica_, the books _after the
physics_: hence the name _metaphysics_,( ) applied to this highest
section of speculative philosophy. It was soon noticed that the term, thus
fortuitously applied to such investigations, conveyed a very appropriate
description of their scope and character if interpreted in the sense of
“_supra_-physica,” or “_trans_-physica”: inasmuch as the object of these
investigations is a _hyperphysical_ object, an object that is either
positively and really, or negatively and by abstraction, beyond the
material conditions of quantity and change. St. Thomas combines both
meanings of the term when he says that the study of its subject-matter
comes naturally _after_ the study of physics, and that we naturally pass
from the study of the sensible to that of the suprasensible.( )

The term _philosophia prima_ has now only an historical interest; and the
term _theology_, used without qualification, is now generally understood
to signify _supernatural_ theology.

VI. DEPARTMENTS OF METAPHYSICS: COSMOLOGY, PSYCHOLOGY, AND NATURAL
THEOLOGY.—Nowadays the term _Metaphysics_ is understood as synonymous with
speculative philosophy: the investigation of the being, nature, or
essence, and essential attributes of the realities which are also studied
in the various special sciences: the search for the _ultimate_ grounds,
reasons and causes of these realities, of which the proximate explanations
are sought in the special sciences. We have seen that it has for its
special object that most abstract aspect of reality whereby the latter is
conceived as changeless and immaterial; and we have seen that a being may
have these attributes either by mental abstraction merely, or in actual
reality. In other words the philosophical study of things that are really
material not only suggests the possibility, but establishes the actual
existence, of a Being that is really changeless and immaterial: so that
metaphysics in all its amplitude would be _the philosophical science of
things that are negatively_ (by abstraction) _or positively_ (in reality)
_immaterial_. This distinction suggests a division of metaphysics into
_general_ and _special_ metaphysics. The former would be the philosophical
study of _all_ being, considered by mental abstraction as immaterial; the
latter would be the philosophical study of the really and positively
changeless and immaterial Being,—God. The former would naturally fall into
two great branches: the study of _inanimate_ nature and the study of
_living_ things, _Cosmology_ and _Psychology_; while special metaphysics,
the philosophical study of the _Divine_ Being, would constitute _Natural
Theology_. These three departments, one of special metaphysics and two of
general metaphysics, would not be three distinct philosophical sciences,
but three departments of the one speculative philosophical science. The
standpoint would be the same in all three sections, _viz._ _being_
considered as _static and immaterial_ by _mental abstraction_: for
whatever _positive_ knowledge we can reach about being that is really
immaterial can be reached only through concepts derived from material
being and applied analogically to immaterial being.

_Cosmology_ and _Psychology_ divide between them the whole domain of man’s
immediate experience. Cosmology, utilizing not only the data of direct
experience, but also the conclusions established by the analytic study of
these data in the physical sciences, explores the origin, nature, and
destiny of the material universe. Some philosophers include among the data
of Cosmology all the phenomena of vegetative life, reserving sentient and
rational life for Psychology; others include even sentient life in
Cosmology, reserving the study of human life for Psychology, or, as they
would call it, Anthropology.( ) The mere matter of location is of
secondary importance. Seeing, however, that man embodies in himself all
three forms of life, vegetative, sentient, and rational, all three would
perhaps more naturally belong to Psychology, which would be the
philosophical study of life in all its manifestations (ψυχή, the vital
principle, the soul). Just as the conclusions of the physical sciences are
the data of Cosmology, so the conclusions of the natural or biological
sciences—Zoology, Botany, Physiology, Morphology, Cellular Biology,
etc.—are the data of Psychology. Indeed in Psychology itself—especially in
more recent years—it is possible to distinguish a positive, analytic,
empirical study of the phenomena of consciousness, a study which would
rank rather as a special than as an ultimate or philosophical science; and
a synthetic, rational study of the results of this analysis, a study which
would be strictly philosophical in character. This would have for its
object to determine the origin, nature and destiny of living things in
general and of man himself in particular. It would inquire into the nature
and essential properties of living matter, into the nature of the subject
of conscious states, into the operations and faculties of the human mind,
into the nature of the human soul and its mode of union with the body,
into the rationality of the human intellect and the freedom of the human
will, the spirituality and immortality of the human soul, etc.

But since the human mind itself is the natural instrument whereby man
acquires _all_ his knowledge, it will be at once apparent that the study
of the phenomenon of _knowledge_ itself, of the _cognitive_ activity of
the mind, can be studied, and must be studied, not merely as a natural
phenomenon of the mind, but from the point of view of _its special
significance as representative_ of objects other than itself, from the
point of view of _its validity or invalidity_, _its truth or falsity_, and
with the special aim of determining the scope and limitations and
conditions of its objective validity. We have already referred to the
study of human knowledge from this standpoint, in connexion with what was
said above concerning Logic. It has a close kinship with Logic on the one
hand, and with Psychology on the other; and nowadays it forms a distinct
branch of speculative Philosophy under the title of _Criteriology_,
_Epistemology_, or the _Theory of Knowledge_.

Arising out of the data of our direct experience, external and internal,
as studied in the philosophical departments just outlined, we find a
variety of evidences all pointing beyond the domain of this direct
experience to the supreme conclusion that there exists of necessity,
distinct from this directly experienced universe, as its Creator,
Conserver, and Ruler, its First Beginning and its Last End, its _Alpha_
and _Omega_, One Divine and Infinite Being, the Deity. The existence and
attributes of the Deity, and the relations of man and the universe to the
Deity, form the subject-matter of _Natural Theology_.

VII. DEPARTMENTS OF METAPHYSICS: ONTOLOGY AND EPISTEMOLOGY.—According to
the Aristotelian and scholastic conception speculative philosophy would
utilize as data the conclusions of the special sciences—physical,
biological, and human. It would try to reach a deeper explanation of their
data by synthesizing these under the wider aspects of change, quantity,
and being, thus bringing to light the ultimate causes, reasons, and
explanatory principles of things. This whole study would naturally fall
into two great branches: General Metaphysics (_Cosmology_ and
_Psychology_), which would study things exempt from quantity and change
not really but only by mental abstraction; and Special Metaphysics
(_Natural Theology_), which would study the positively immaterial and
immutable Being of the Deity.

This division of Metaphysics, thoroughly sound in principle, and based on
a sane and rational view of the relation between the special sciences and
philosophy, has been almost entirely( ) supplanted in modern times by a
division which, abstracting from the erroneous attitude that prompted it
in the first instance, has much to recommend it from the standpoint of
practical convenience of treatment. The modern division was introduced by
Wolff ( - ), a German philosopher,—a disciple of Leibniz ( - )
and forerunner of Kant ( - ).( ) Influenced by the excessively
deductive method of Leibniz’ philosophy, which he sought to systematize
and to popularize, he wrongly conceived the metaphysical study of reality
as something wholly apart and separate from the inductive investigation of
this same reality in the positive sciences. It comprised the study of the
most fundamental and essential principles of being, considered in
themselves; and the deductive application of these principles to the three
great domains of actual reality, the corporeal universe, the human soul,
and God. The study of the first principles of being in themselves would
constitute _General Metaphysics_, or _Ontology_ (ὄντος-λόγος). Their
applications would constitute three great departments of _Special
Metaphysics_: _Cosmology_, which he described as “transcendental” in
opposition to the experimental physical sciences; _Psychology_, which he
termed “rational” in opposition to the empirical biological sciences; and
finally Natural Theology, which he entitled _Theodicy_
(Θεός-δίκη-δικαιόω), using a term invented by Leibniz for his essays in
vindication of the wisdom and justice of Divine Providence notwithstanding
the evils of the universe.


    “The spirit that animated this arrangement of the departments of
    metaphysics,” writes Mercier, “was unsound in theory and
    unfortunate in tendency. It stereotyped for centuries a disastrous
    divorce between philosophy and the sciences, a divorce that had
    its origin in circumstances peculiar to the intellectual
    atmosphere of the early eighteenth century. As a result of it
    there was soon no common language or understanding between
    scientists and philosophers. The terms which expressed the most
    fundamental ideas—matter, substance, movement, cause, force,
    energy, and such like—were taken in different senses in science
    and in philosophy. Hence misunderstandings, aggravated by a
    growing mutual distrust and hostility, until finally people came
    to believe that scientific and metaphysical preoccupations were
    incompatible if not positively opposed to each other.”( )

    How very different from the disintegrating conception here
    criticized is the traditional Aristotelian and scholastic
    conception of the complementary functions of philosophy and the
    sciences in unifying human knowledge: a conception thus eloquently
    expressed by NEWMAN in his _Idea of a University_:—( )

    “All that exists, as contemplated by the human mind, forms one
    large system or complex fact.... Now, it is not wonderful that,
    with all its capabilities, the human mind cannot take in this
    whole vast fact at a single glance, or gain possession of it at
    once. Like a short-sighted reader, its eye pores closely, and
    travels slowly, over the awful volume which lies open for its
    inspection. Or again, as we deal with some huge structure of many
    parts and sides, the mind goes round about it, noting down, first
    one thing, then another, as best it may, and viewing it under
    different aspects, by way of making progress towards mastering the
    whole.... These various partial views or abstractions ... are
    called sciences ... they proceed on the principle of a division of
    labour.... As they all belong to one and the same circle of
    objects, they are one and all connected together; as they are but
    aspects of things, they are severally incomplete in their relation
    to the things themselves, though complete in their own idea and
    for their own respective purposes; on both accounts they at once
    need and subserve each other. And further, the comprehension of
    the bearings of one science on another, and the use of each to
    each, and the location and limitation and adjustment and due
    appreciation of them all, one with another, this belongs, I
    conceive, to a sort of science distinct from all of them, and in
    some sense, a science of sciences, which is my own conception of
    what is meant by Philosophy....”


Without in any way countenancing such an isolation of metaphysics from the
positive sciences, we may, nevertheless, adopt the modern division in
substance and in practice. While recognizing the intimate connexion
between the special sciences and metaphysics in all its branches, we may
regard as _General Metaphysics_ all inquiries into the fundamental
principles of _being_ and of _knowing_, of _reality_ and of _knowledge_;
and as _Special Metaphysics_ the philosophical study of physical nature,
of human nature, and of God, the Author and Supreme Cause of all finite
reality. Thus, while special metaphysics would embrace Cosmology,
Psychology, and Natural Theology, general metaphysics would embrace
Ontology and Epistemology. These two latter disciplines must no doubt
investigate what is in a certain sense one and the same subject-matter,
inasmuch as _knowledge_ is knowledge of reality, nor can the _knowing
mind_ (the _subjectum cognoscens_) and the known reality (the _objectum
cognitum_) be wholly separated or studied in complete isolation from each
other. Yet the whole content of human experience, which forms their common
subject-matter, can be regarded by mental abstraction from the two
distinct standpoints of the knowing mind and the known reality, and can
thus give rise to two distinct sets of problems. Epistemology is thus
concerned with the truth and certitude of human knowledge; with the
subjective conditions and the scope and limits of its validity; with the
subjective or mental factors involved in knowing.( ) Ontology is
concerned with the objects of knowledge, with reality considered in the
widest, deepest, and most fundamental aspects under which it is conceived
by the human mind: with the being and becoming of reality, its possibility
and its actuality, its essence and its existence, its unity and plurality;
with the aspects of truth, goodness, perfection, beauty, which it assumes
in relation with our minds; with the contingency of finite reality and the
grounds and implications both of its actual existence and of its
intelligibility; with the modes of its concrete existence and behaviour,
the supreme categories of reality as they are called: substance,
individual nature, and personality; quantity, space and time, quality and
relation, causality and purpose. These are the principal topics
investigated in the present volume. The investigation is confined to
fundamental concepts and principles, leaving their applications to be
followed out in special metaphysics. Furthermore, the theory of knowledge
known as _Moderate Realism_,( ) the Realism of Aristotle and the
Scholastics, in regard to the validity of knowledge both sensual and
intellectual, is assumed throughout: because not alone is this the true
theory, but—as a natural consequence—it is the only theory which renders
the individual things and events of human experience really intelligible,
and at the same time keeps the highest and most abstract intellectual
speculations of metaphysics in constant and wholesome contact with the
concrete, actual world in which we live, move, and have our being.

VIII. REMARKS ON SOME MISGIVINGS AND PREJUDICES.—The student, especially
the beginner, will find the investigations in this volume rather abstract;
but if he remembers that the content of our intellectual concepts, be they
ever so abstract and universal, is really embodied in the individual
things and events of his daily experience, he will not be disposed to
denounce all ultimate analysis of these concepts as “unprofitable” or
“unreal”. He will recognize that the reproach of “talking in the air,”
which was levelled by an eminent medieval scholastic( ) at certain
philosophers of his time, tells against the metaphysical speculations of
Conceptualism, but not against those of Moderate Realism. The reproach is
commonly cast at _all_ systematic metaphysics nowadays—from prejudices too
numerous and varied to admit of investigation here.( ) The modern
prejudice which denies the very possibility of metaphysics, a prejudice
arising from Phenomenism, Positivism, and Agnosticism—systems which are
themselves no less metaphysical than erroneous—will be examined in due
course.( )

But really in order to dispel all such misgivings one has only to remember
that metaphysics, systematic or otherwise, is nothing more than a man’s
reasoned outlook on the world and life. Whatever his conscious opinions
and convictions may be regarding the nature and purpose of himself, and
other men, and the world at large—and if he use his reason at all he must
have some sort of opinions and convictions, whether positive or negative,
on these matters—those opinions and convictions are precisely that man’s
metaphysics. “Breaking free for the moment from all historical and
technical definition, let us affirm: _To get at reality_—this is the aim
of metaphysics.” So writes Professor Ladd in the opening chapter of his
_Theory of Reality_.( ) But if this is so, surely a systematic attempt to
“get at reality,” no matter how deep and wide, no matter how abstract and
universal be the conceptions and speculations to which it leads us, cannot
nevertheless always and of necessity have the effect of involving us in a
mirage of illusion and unreality.


    Systematic metaphysics—to quote again the author just referred
    to—( ) is ... the necessary result of a patient, orderly,
    well-informed, and prolonged study of those ultimate problems
    which are proposed to every reflective mind by the real existences
    and actual transactions of selves and of things. Thus considered
    it appears as the least abstract and foreign to concrete realities
    of all the higher pursuits of reason. Mathematics is abstract;
    logic is abstract; mathematical and so-called “pure” physics are
    abstract. But metaphysics is bound by its very nature and calling
    always to keep near to the actual and to the concrete. Dive into
    the depths of speculation indeed it may; and its ocean is
    boundless in expanse and deep beyond all reach of human plummets.
    But it finds its place of standing, for every new turn of daring
    explanation, on some bit of solid ground. For it is actuality
    which it wishes to understand—although in reflective and
    interpretative way. To quote from Professor Royce: “The basis of
    our whole theory is the bare, brute fact of experience which you
    have always with you, namely, the fact: _Something is real._ Our
    question is: What is this reality? or, again, What is the
    ultimately real?”( )


The wonderful progress of the positive sciences during the last few
centuries has been the occasion of prejudice against metaphysics in a
variety of ways. It is objected, for instance, that metaphysics has no
corresponding progress to boast of; and from this there is but a small
step to the conclusion that all metaphysical speculation is sterile. The
comparison is unfair for many reasons. Research into the ultimate grounds
and causes of things is manifestly more difficult than research into their
proximate grounds and causes. Again, while the positive sciences have
increased our knowledge mainly in extent rather than in depth, it is
metaphysics and only metaphysics that can increase this knowledge in its
unity, comprehensiveness, and significance.

A positive increase in our knowledge of the manifold data of human
experience is not the aim of metaphysics; its aim is to give an ultimate
meaning and interpretation to this knowledge. It is not utilitarian in the
narrower sense in which the positive and special sciences are utilitarian
by ministering to our material needs; but in the higher and nobler sense
of pointing out to us the bearing of all human knowledge and achievement
on our real nature and destiny. True, indeed, individual leaders and
schools of metaphysics have strayed from the truth and spoken with
conflicting and uncertain voices, especially when they have failed to
avail themselves of Truth Divinely Revealed. This, however, is not a
failure of metaphysics but of individual metaphysicians. And furthermore,
it is undeniable withal, that the metaphysical labours of the great
philosophers in all ages have contributed richly to the enlightenment and
civilization of mankind—particularly when these labours have been in
concord and co-operation with the elevating and purifying influences of
the Christian religion. Of no metaphysical system is this so entirely true
as of that embodied in Scholastic Philosophy. The greatest intellect of
the Middle Ages, St. Thomas Aquinas, gave to this philosophy an expression
which is rightly regarded by the modern scholastic as his intellectual
charter and the most worthy starting-point of his philosophical
investigations. The following passage from an eminent representative of
modern scholastic thought( ) is sufficiently suggestive to admit of
quotation:—


    Amid the almost uninterrupted disintegration of systems during the
    last three centuries, the philosophy of St. Thomas has alone been
    able to stand the shock of criticism; it alone has proved
    sufficiently solid and comprehensive to serve as an intellectual
    basis and unifying principle for all the new facts and phenomena
    brought to light by the modern sciences. And unless we are much
    mistaken, those who take up and follow this philosophy will come
    to think, as we do, that on the analysis of mental acts and
    processes, on the inner nature of corporeal things, of living
    things, and of man, on the existence and nature of God, on the
    foundations of speculative and moral science, none have thought or
    written more wisely than St. Thomas Aquinas. But though we place
    our programme and teaching under the patronage of the illustrious
    name of this prince of scholastics, we do not regard the Thomistic
    philosophy as an ideal beyond possibility of amelioration, or as a
    boundary to the activity of the human mind. We do think, however,
    on mature reflection, that we are acting no less wisely than
    modestly in taking it as our starting-point and constant standard
    of reference. This we say in answer to those of our friends and
    enemies who are occasionally pleased to ask us if we really do
    mean to lead back the modern mind into the Middle Ages, and to
    identify philosophy _simply_ with the thought of any _one_
    philosopher. Manifestly, we mean nothing of the kind. Has not Leo
    XIII., the great initiator of the new scholastic movement,
    expressly warned us( ) to be mindful of the present: “Edicimus
    libenti gratoque animo recipiendum esse quidquid sapienter dictum,
    quidquid utiliter fuerit a quopiam inventum atque excogitatum”?

    St. Thomas himself would be the first to rebuke those who would
    follow his own philosophical opinions in all things against their
    own better judgment, and to remind them of what he wrote at the
    head of his _Summa_: that in philosophy, of all arguments that
    based on human authority is the weakest, “locus ab auctoritate quæ
    fundatur super ratione humana, est infirmissimus.”( )

    Again, therefore, let us assert that respect for tradition is not
    servility but mere elementary prudence. Respect for a doctrine of
    whose soundness and worth we are personally convinced is not
    fetishism; it is but a rational and rightful tribute to the
    dominion of Truth over Mind.

    Modern scholastics will know how to take to heart and profit by
    the lessons of the seventeenth and eighteenth century
    controversies; they will avoid the mistakes of their predecessors;
    they will keep in close contact with the special sciences
    subsidiary to philosophy and with the views and teachings of
    modern and contemporary thinkers.( )


An overweening confidence in the power of the special sciences to solve
ultimate questions, or at least to tell us all that can be known for
certain about these problems, a confidence based on the astonishing
progress of those sciences in modern times, is the source of yet another
prejudice against metaphysics. It is a prejudice of the half-educated
mind, of the camp-followers of science, not of its leaders. These latter
are keenly conscious that the solution of ultimate questions lies entirely
beyond the methods of the special sciences. Not that even the most eminent
scientists do not indulge in speculations about ultimate problems—as they
have a perfect right to do. But though they may be themselves quite aware
that such speculations are distinctly metaphysical, there are multitudes
who seem to think that a theory ceases to be metaphysical and becomes
scientific provided only it is broached by a scientific expert as distinct
from a metaphysician.( ) But all sincere thinkers will recognize that no
ultimate question about the totality of human experience can be solved by
any science which explores merely a portion of this experience. Nay, the
more rapid and extensive is the progress of the various special sciences,
the more imperative and insistent becomes the need to collect and collate
their separate findings, to interrogate them one and all as to whether and
how far these findings fit in with the facts and conditions of human life
and existence, to determine what light and aid they contribute to the
solution of the great and ever recurring questions of the _whence_? and
_whither_? and _why_? of man and the universe. One who is a sincere
scientist as well as an earnest philosopher has written _à propos_ of this
necessity in the following terms:—


    The farther science has pushed back the limits of the discernible
    universe, the more insistently do we feel the demand within us for
    some satisfactory explanation of the whole. The old, eternal
    problems rise up before us and clamour loudly and ever more loudly
    for some newer and better solution. The solution offered by a
    bygone age was soothing at least, if it was not final. In the
    present age, however, the problems reappear with an acuteness that
    is almost painful: the deep secret of our own human nature, the
    questions of our origin and destiny, the intermeddling of blind
    necessity and chance and pain in the strange, tangled drama of our
    existence, the foibles and oddities of the human soul, and all the
    mystifying problems of social relations: are not these all so many
    enigmas which torment and trouble us whithersoever we turn? And
    all seem to circle around the one essential question: Has human
    nature a real meaning and value, or is it so utterly amiss that
    truth and peace will never be its portion?( )


A final difficulty against philosophical research is suggested by the
thought that if the philosopher has to take cognizance of all the
conclusions of all the special sciences his task is an impossible one,
inasmuch as nowadays at all events it would take a lifetime to become
proficient in a few of these sciences not to speak of all of them.

There is no question, however, of becoming proficient in them; the
philosopher need not be a specialist in any positive science; his
acquaintance with the contents of these sciences need extend no farther
than such established conclusions and such current though unverified
hypotheses as have an immediate bearing on ultimate or philosophical
problems.

Moreover, while it would be injurious both to philosophy and to science,
as is proved by the history of both alike, to separate synthetic from
analytic speculation by a divorce between philosophy and science; while it
would be unwise to ignore the conclusions of the special sciences and to
base philosophical research _exclusively_ on the data of the plain man’s
common and unanalysed experience, it must be remembered on the other hand
that the most fundamental truths of speculative and practical philosophy,
the truths that are most important for the right and proper orientation of
human life, can be established and defended independently of the special
researches of the positive sciences. The human mind had not to await the
discovery of radium in order to prove the existence of God. Such supreme
truths as the existence of God, the immortality of the human soul, the
freedom of the human will, the existence of a moral law, the distinction
between right and wrong, etc., have been _always_ in possession of the
human race. It has been, moreover, confirmed in its possession of them by
Divine Revelation. And it has not needed either the rise or the progress
of modern science to defend them. These fundamental rational truths
constitute a _philosophia perennis_: a fund of truth which is, like all
truth, _immutable_, though our human insight into it may develop in depth
and clearness.

But while this is so it is none the less true that philosophy, to be
progressive in its own order, must take account of every new fact and
conclusion brought to light in every department of scientific—and
historical, and artistic, and literary, and every other sort of—research.
And this for the simple reason that every such accession, whether of fact
or of theory, is an enlargement of human experience; as such it clamours
on the one hand for philosophical interpretation, for explanation in the
light of what we know already about the ultimate grounds and causes of
things, for admission into our world-outlook, for adjustment and
co-ordination with the previous contents of the latter; while, on the
other hand, by its very appearance on the horizon of human experience it
may enrich or illumine, rectify or otherwise influence, this outlook or
some aspect of it.( )

If, then, philosophy has to take account of advances in every other
department of human research, it is clear that its mastery at the present
day is a more laborious task than ever it was in the past. In order to get
an intelligent grasp of its principles in their applications to the
problems raised by the progress of the sciences, to newly discovered facts
and newly propounded hypotheses, the student must be familiar with these
facts and hypotheses; and all the more so because through the medium of a
sensational newspaper press that has more regard for novelty than truth,
these facts and hypotheses are no sooner brought to light by scientists
than what are often garbled and distorted versions of them are circulated
among the masses.( )

Similarly, in order that a sound system of speculative and practical
philosophy be expounded, developed, and defended at the present time, a
system that will embrace and co-ordinate the achieved results of modern
scientific research, a system that will offer the most satisfactory
solutions of old difficulties in new forms and give the most reasonable
and reliable answers to the ever recurring questionings of man concerning
his own nature and destiny—it is clear that the insufficiency of
individual effort must be supplemented by the co-operation of numbers. It
is the absence of fulness, completeness, adequacy, in most modern systems
of philosophy, their fragmentary character, the unequal development of
their parts, that accounts very largely for the despairing attitude of the
many who nowadays despise and turn away from philosophical speculation.
Add to this the uncertain voice with which these philosophies speak in
consequence of their advocates ignoring the implications of the most
stupendous fact in human experience,—the Christian Revelation. But there
is one philosophy which is free from these defects, a philosophy which is
in complete harmony with Revealed Truth, and which forms with the latter
the only true _Philosophy of Life_; and that one philosophy is the system
which, assimilating the wisdom of Plato, Aristotle and all the other
greatest thinkers of the world, has been traditionally expounded in the
Christian schools—the _Scholastic_ system of philosophy. It has been
elaborated by no one man, and is the original fruit of no one mind. Unlike
the philosophies of Kant or Hegel or Spencer or James or Comte or Bergson,
it is not a “one-man” philosophy. It cannot boast of the novelty or
originality of the many eccentric and ephemeral “systems” which have
succeeded one another so rapidly in recent times in the world of
intellectual fashion; but it has ever possessed the enduring novelty of
the _truth_, which is ever ancient and ever new. Now although this
philosophy may have been mastered in its broad outlines and applications
by specially gifted individuals in past ages, its progressive exposition
and development, and its application to the vastly extended and
ever-growing domains of experience that are being constantly explored by
the special sciences, can never be the work of any individual: it can be
accomplished only by the earnest co-operation of Christian philosophers in
every part of the civilized world.( )

In carrying on this work we have not to build from the beginning. “It has
sometimes been remarked,” as Newman observes,( ) “when men have boasted
of the knowledge of modern times, that no wonder we see more than the
ancients because we are mounted upon their shoulders.” Yes; the
intellectual toilers of to-day are heirs to the intellectual wealth of
their ancestors. We have tradition: not to despise but to use, critically,
judiciously, reverently, if we are to use it profitably. Thomas Davis has
somewhere said that they who demolish the past do not build up for the
future. And we have the Christian Revelation, as a _lamp_ to our _feet_
and a _light_ to our _paths_( ) in all those rational investigations
which form the appointed task of the philosopher. Hence,


    Let knowledge grow from more to more,
      But more of reverence in us dwell;
      That mind and soul, according well,
    May make one music as before,
    But vaster.( )





CHAPTER I. BEING AND ITS PRIMARY DETERMINATIONS.


 . OUR CONCEPT OF BEING: ITS EXPRESSION AND FEATURES.—The term “_Being_”
(Lat. _ens_; Gr. ὤν; Ger. _Seiend_; Fr. _étant_) as present participle of
the verb _to be_ (Lat. _esse_; Gr. ἔιναι; Ger. _Sein_; Fr. _être_) means
_existing_ (_existens_, _existere_). But the participle has come to be
used as a noun; and as such it does not necessarily imply actual existence
_hic et nunc_. It does indeed imply some relation to actual existence; for
we designate as “being” (in the substantive sense) only whatever we
conceive as actually existing or at least as capable of existing; and it
is from the participial sense, which implies actual existence, that the
substantive sense has been derived. Moreover, the intelligible use of the
word “being” as a term implies a reference to some actually existing
sphere of reality.( ) It is in the substantive meaning the term will be
most frequently used in these pages, as the context will show. When we
speak of “a being” in the concrete, the word has the same meaning as
“thing” (_res_) used in the wide sense in which this latter includes
persons, places, events, facts and phenomena of whatsoever kind. In the
same sense we speak of “a reality,” this term having taken on a concrete,
in addition to its original abstract, meaning. “Being” has also this
abstract sense when we speak of “the being or reality of things”. Finally
it may be used in a collective sense to indicate the sum-total of all that
is or can be—all reality.

(_a_) The notion of being, spontaneously reached by the human mind, is
found on reflection to be the _simplest_ of all notions, defying every
attempt at analysis into simpler notions. It is involved in every other
concept which we form of any object of thought whatsoever. Without it we
could have no concept of anything.

(_b_) It is thus the first of all notions _in the logical order_, _i.e._
in the process of rational thought.

(_c_) It is also the _first_ of all notions _in the chronological order_,
the first which the human mind forms in the order of time. Not, of course,
that we remember having formed it before any other more determinate
notions. But the child’s awakening intellectual activity must have
proceeded from the simplest, easiest, most superficial of all concepts, to
fuller, clearer, and more determinate concepts, _i.e._ from the vague and
confused notion of “being” or “thing” to notions of definite modes of
being, or kinds of thing.

(_d_) This direct notion of being is likewise the _most indeterminate_ of
all notions; though not of course entirely indeterminate. An object of
thought, to be conceivable or intelligible at all by our finite minds,
must be rendered definite in some manner and degree; and even this widest
notion of “being” is rendered intelligible only by being conceived as
positive and as contrasting with absolute non-being or nothingness.( )


    According to the Hegelian philosophy “pure thought” can apparently
    think “pure being,” _i.e._ being in absolute indeterminateness,
    being as not even differentiated from “pure not-being” or absolute
    nothingness. And this absolutely indeterminate confusion (we may
    not call it a “synthesis” or “unity”) of something and nothing, of
    being and not-being, of positive and negative, of affirmation and
    denial, would be conceived by our finite minds as the objective
    correlative of, and at the same time as absolutely identical with,
    its subjective correlative which is “pure thought”. Well, it is
    with the human mind and its objects, and how it thinks those
    objects, that we are concerned at present; not with speculations
    involving the gratuitous assumption of a Being that would
    transcend all duality of subject and object, all determinateness
    of knowing and being, all distinction of thought and thing. We
    believe that the human mind can establish the existence of a
    Supreme Being whose mode of Thought and Existence transcends all
    human comprehension, but it can do so only as the culminating
    achievement of all its speculation; and the transcendent Being it
    thus reaches has nothing in common with the monistic ideal-real
    being of Hegel’s philosophy. In endeavouring to set out from the
    high _a priori_ ground of such an intangible conception, the
    Hegelian philosophy starts at the wrong end.


(_e_) Further, the notion of being is the _most abstract_ of all notions,
poorest in intension as it is widest in extension. We derive it from the
data of our experience, and the process by which we reach it is a process
of abstraction. We lay aside all the differences whereby things are
distinguished from one another; we do not consider these differences; we
prescind or abstract from them mentally, and retain for consideration only
what is common to all of them. This common element forms the explicit
content of our notion of being.

It must be noted, however, that we do not _positively exclude_ the
differences from the _object_ of our concept; we cannot do this, for the
simple reason that the differences too are “being,” inasmuch as they too
are modes of being. Our attitude towards them is _negative_; we merely
abstain from considering them explicitly, though they remain in our
concept implicitly. The separation effected is only mental, subjective,
notional, formal, negative; not objective, not real, not positive. Hence
the process by which we narrow down the concept of being to the more
comprehensive concept of this or that generic or specific mode of being,
does not add to the former concept anything really new, or distinct from,
or extraneous to it; but rather brings out explicitly something that was
implicit in the latter. The composition of being with its modes is,
therefore, only _logical_ composition, not real.

On the other hand, it would seem that when we abstract a generic mode of
being from the specific modes subordinate to the former, we _positively
exclude_ the differentiating characteristics of these species; and that,
conversely, when we narrow down the genus to a subordinate species we do
so by _adding on_ a differentiating mode which was not contained even
implicitly in the generic concept. Thus, for example, the differentiating
concept “rational” is not contained even implicitly in the generic concept
“animal”: it is added on _ab extra_ to the latter( ) in order to reach
the specific concept of “rational animal” or “man”; so that in abstracting
the generic from the subordinate specific concept we prescind
_objectively_ and _really_ from the differentiating concept, by positively
excluding this latter. This kind of abstraction is called objective, real,
positive; and the composition of such generic and differentiating modes of
being is technically known as _metaphysical_ composition. The different
modes of being, which the mind can distinguish at different levels of
abstraction in any specific concept—such as “rational,” “sentient,”
“living,” “corporeal,” in the concept of “man”—are likewise known as
“metaphysical grades” of being.


    It has been questioned whether this latter kind of abstraction is
    always used in relating generic, specific, and differential modes
    of being. At first sight it would not appear to be a quite
    satisfactory account of the process in cases where the generic
    notion exhibits a mode of being which can be embodied only in one
    or other of a number of alternative specific modes by means of
    _differentiae_ not found in any things lying outside the genus
    itself. The generic notion of “plane rectilinear figure” does not,
    of course, include explicitly its species “triangle,”
    “quadrilateral,” “pentagon,” etc.; nor does it include even
    implicitly any definite one of them. But the concept of each of
    the differentiating characters, _e.g._ the _differentia_
    “three-sidedness,” is unintelligible except as a mode of a “plane
    rectilinear figure”.( ) This, however, is only accidental, _i.e._
    due to the special objects considered;( ) and even here there
    persists this difference that whereas what differentiates the
    species of plane rectilinear figures is not explicitly and
    formally plane-rectilinearity, that which differentiates finite
    from infinite being, or substantial from accidental being, is
    itself also formally and explicitly _being_. But there are other
    cases in which the abstraction is manifestly objective. Thus, for
    example, the differentiating concept “rational” does not even
    implicitly include the generic concept “animal,” for the former
    concept may be found realized in beings other than animals; and
    the differentiating concept “living” does not even implicitly
    include the concept “corporeal,” for it may be found realized in
    incorporeal beings.


(_f_) Since the notion of being is so simple that it cannot be analysed
into simpler notions which might serve as its _genus_ and _differentia_,
it _cannot_ strictly speaking _be defined_. We can only describe it by
considering it from various points of view and comparing it with the
various modes in which we find it realized. This is what we have been
attempting so far. Considering its fundamental relation to existence we
might say that “Being is that which exists or is at least capable of
existing”: _Ens est id quod existit vel saltem existere potest._ Or,
considering its relation to its opposite we might say that “Being is that
which is not absolute nothingness”: _Ens est id quod non est nihil
absolutum._ Or, considering its relation to our minds, we might say that
“Being is whatever is thinkable, whatever can be an object of thought”.

(_g_) The notion of being is so universal that it transcends all actual
and conceivable determinate modes of being: it embraces infinite being and
all modes of finite being. In other words it is _not itself a generic, but
a transcendental notion_. Wider than all, even the widest and highest
genera, it is not itself a genus. A genus is determinable into its species
by the addition of differences which lie outside the concept of the genus
itself; being, as we have seen, is not in this way determinable into its
modes.

 . IN WHAT SENSE ARE ALL THINGS THAT EXIST OR CAN EXIST SAID TO BE “REAL”
OR TO HAVE “BEING”?—A generic concept can be predicated _univocally_,
_i.e._ in the same sense, of its subordinate species. These latter differ
from one another by characteristics which lie outside the concept of the
genus, while they all agree in realizing the generic concept itself: they
do not of course realize it in the same way,( ) but as such it is really
and truly in each of them and is predicated in the same sense of each. But
the characteristics which differentiate all genera and species from one
another, and from the common notion of being, in which they all agree, are
likewise _being_. That in which they differ is being, as well as that in
which they agree. _Hence we do not predicate _“being”_ univocally of its
various modes._ When we say of the various classes of things which make up
our experience that they are “real” (or “realities,” or “beings”), we do
not apply this predicate in altogether the same sense to the several
classes; for as applied to each class it connotes the whole content of
each, not merely the part in which this agrees with, but also the part in
which it differs from, the others. Nor yet do we apply the concept of
“being” in a totally different sense to each separate determinate mode of
being. When we predicate “being” of its modes _the predication is not
merely equivocal_. The concept expressed by the predicate-term “being” is
not totally different as applied to each subject-mode; for in all cases
alike it implies either actual existence or some relation thereto. It only
remains, therefore, that we must regard the notion of being, when
predicated of its several modes, _as partly the same and partly
different_; and this is what we mean when we say that _the concept of
being is analogical, that being is predicated analogically of its various
modes_.

Analogical predication is of two kinds: a term or concept may be affirmed
of a variety of subjects either by analogy _of attribution_ or by analogy
_of proportion_. We may, for instance, speak not only of a man as
“healthy,” but also of his food, his countenance, his occupation, his
companionship, etc., as “healthy”. Now health is found really only in the
man, but it is _attributed_ to the other things owing to some extrinsic
but real connexion which they have with his health, whether as cause, or
effect, or indication, of the latter. This is analogy of attribution; the
subject of which the predicate is properly and primarily affirmed being
known as the primary analogue or _analogum princeps_, those to which it is
transferred being called the _analogata_. It underlies the figures of
speech known as metynomy and synechdoche. Now on account of the various
relations that exist between the different modes of being, relations of
cause and effect, whole and part, means and end, ground and consequence,
etc.—relations which constitute the _orders_ of existing and possible
things, the _physical_ and the _metaphysical_ orders—being is of course
predicated of its modes by _analogy of attribution_; and in such
predication infinite being is the primary analogue for finite beings, and
the substance-mode of being for all accident-modes of being.

Inasmuch, however, as being is not merely attributed to these modes
extrinsically, but belongs to all of them intrinsically, it is also
predicated of them by _analogy of proportion_. This latter sort of analogy
is based on similarity of relations. For example, the act of understanding
bears a relation to the mind similar to that which the act of seeing bears
to the eye, and hence we say of the mind that it “sees” things when it
understands them. Or, again, we speak of a verdant valley in the sunshine
as “smiling,” because its appearance bears a relation to the valley
similar to that which a smile bears to the human countenance. Or again, we
speak of the parched earth as “thirsting” for the rains, or of the devout
soul as “thirsting” for God, because these relations are recognized as
similar to that of a thirsty person towards the drink for which he
thirsts. In all such cases the analogical concept implies not indeed the
same attribute (differently realized) in all the analogues (as in univocal
predication) but rather a similarity in the relation or proportion in
which each analogue embodies or realizes some attribute or attributes
peculiar to itself. Seeing is to the eye as understanding is to the mind;
smiling is to the countenance as the pleasing appearance of its natural
features is to the valley. Rain is to the parched earth, and God is to the
devout soul, as drink is to the thirsty person. It will be noted that in
all such cases the analogical concept is affirmed primarily and properly
of some one thing (the _analogum princeps_), and of the other only
secondarily, and relatively to the former.

Now, if we reflect on the manner in which being is affirmed of its various
modes (_e.g._ of the infinite and the finite; or of substance and
accident; or of spiritual and corporeal substances; or of quantities, or
qualities, or causes, etc.) we can see _firstly_ that although these
differ from one another _by all that each of them is, by the whole being
of each_, yet there is an all-pervading similarity between the relations
which these modes bear each to its own existence. All have, or can have,
actual existence: each according to the grade of perfection of its own
reality. If we conceive infinite being as the cause of all finite beings,
then the former exists in a manner appropriate to its all-perfect reality,
and finite beings in a manner proportionate to their limited realities;
and so of the various modes of finite being among themselves. Moreover, we
can see _secondly_, as will be explained more fully below,( ) that being
is affirmed of the finite by virtue of its dependence on the infinite, and
of accident by virtue of its dependence on substance.( ) Being or reality
is therefore predicated of its modes by _analogy of proportion_.( )

Is a concept, when applied in this way, one, or is it really manifold? It
is not simply one, for this would yield univocal predication; nor is it
simply manifold, for this would give equivocal predication. Being,
considered in its vague, imperfect, inadequate sense, as involving some
common or similar proportion or relation to existence in all its
analogues, is one; considered as representing clearly and adequately what
is thus similarly related to each of the analogues, it is manifold.

Analogy of proportion is the basis of the figure of speech known as
metaphor. It would be a mistake, however, to infer from this that what is
thus analogically predicated of a number of things belongs intrinsically
and properly only to one of them, being transferred by a mere extrinsic
denomination to the others; and that therefore it does not express any
genuine knowledge on our part about the nature of these other things. It
does give us real knowledge about them. Metaphor is not equivocation; but
perhaps more usually it is understood not to give us real knowledge
because it is understood to be based on resemblances that are merely
_fanciful_, not real. Still, no matter how slender and remote be the
proportional resemblance on which the analogical use of language is based,
in so far forth as it has such a _real_ basis it gives us real insight
into the nature of the analogues. And if we hesitate to describe such a
use of language as “metaphorical,” this is only because “metaphor” perhaps
too commonly connotes a certain transferred and improper extension of the
meaning of terms, based upon a _purely fanciful_ resemblance.

All our language is primarily and _properly_ expressive of concepts
derived from the sensible appearances of material realities. As applied to
the suprasensible, intelligible aspects of these realities, such as
substance and cause, or to spiritual realities, such as the human soul and
God, it is analogical in another sense; not as opposed to univocal, but as
opposed to _proper_. That is, it expresses concepts which are not formed
directly from the presence of the things which they signify, but are
gathered from other things to which the latter are necessarily related in
a variety of ways.( ) Considering the origin of our knowledge, the
material, the sensible, the phenomenal, comes first in order, and moulds
our concepts and language primarily to its own proper representation and
expression; while the spiritual, the intelligible, the substantial, comes
later, and must make use of the concepts and language thus already
moulded.

If we consider, however, not the order in which we get our knowledge, but
the order of _reality_ in the objects of our knowledge, being or reality
is primarily and more properly predicated of the infinite than of the
finite, of the Creator than of the creature, of the spiritual than of the
material, of substances than of their accidents and sensible
manifestations or phenomena. Yet we do not predicate being or reality of
the finite, or of creatures, in a mere transferred, extrinsic, improper
sense, as if these were mere manifestations of the infinite, or mere
effects of the First Cause, to which alone reality would properly belong.
For creatures, finite things, are in a true and proper sense also real.


    Duns Scotus and those who think with him contend that the concept
    of being, derived as it is from our experience of finite being, if
    applied only analogically to infinite being would give us no
    genuine knowledge about the latter. They maintain that whenever a
    universal concept is applied to the objects in which it is
    _realized intrinsically_, it is affirmed of these objects
    _univocally_. The notion of being, in its most imperfect,
    inadequate, indeterminate sense, is, they say, _one and the same_
    in so far forth as it is applicable to the infinite and the
    finite, and to all the modes of the finite; and it is therefore
    predicated of all univocally.( ) But although they apply the
    concept of being univocally to the infinite and the finite, _i.e._
    to God and creatures, they admit that the _reality_ corresponding
    to this univocal concept is _totally different_ in God and in
    creatures: that God differs by _all that He is_ from creatures,
    and they by _all that they are_ from Him. While, however, Scotists
    emphasize the formal oneness or identity of the indeterminate
    common concept, followers of St. Thomas emphasize the fact that
    the various modes of being differ totally, by all that each of
    them is, from one another; and, from this radical diversity in the
    modes of being, they infer that the common concept should not be
    regarded as _simply_ the same, but only as _proportionally_ the
    same, as expressive of a _similar relation_ of each intrinsically
    different mode of reality to actual existence.

    Thomists lay still greater stress, perhaps, upon the second
    consideration referred to above, as a reason for regarding being
    as an analogical concept when affirmed of Creator and creature, or
    of substance and accident: the consideration that the finite is
    _dependent_ on the infinite, and accident on substance. If being
    is realized in a true and proper sense, and intrinsically, as it
    undoubtedly is, in whatever is distinguishable from nothingness,
    why not say that we should affirm being or reality of all things
    “either as a genus in the strict sense, or else in some sense not
    analogical but proper, after the manner in which we predicate a
    genus of its species and individuals?... Since the object of our
    universal idea of being is admitted to be really in all things, we
    can evidently abstract from what is proper to substance and to
    accident, just as we abstract from what is proper to plants and to
    animals when we affirm of these that they are living things.”( )

    “In reply to this difficulty,” Father Kleutgen continues,( ) “we
    say in the first place that the idea of being is in truth less
    analogical and more proper than any belonging to the first sort of
    analogy [_i.e._ of attribution], and that therefore it approaches
    more closely to generic concepts properly so called. At the same
    time the difference which separates both from the latter concepts
    remains. For a name applied to many things is analogical if what
    it signifies is realized _par excellence_ in one, and in the
    others only subordinately and dependently on that. Hence it is
    that Aristotle regards predication as analogical when something is
    affirmed of many things ( ) either because these have a certain
    relation to some one thing, ( ) or because they depend on some one
    thing. In the former case the thing signified by the name is
    really and properly found only in one single thing, and is
    affirmed of all the others only in virtue of some real relation of
    these to the former, whether this be (_a_) that these things
    merely resemble that single thing [metaphor], or (_b_) bear some
    other relation to it, such as that of effect to cause, etc.
    [metonymy]. In the latter case the thing signified by the name is
    really in each of the things of which it is affirmed; but it is in
    one alone _par excellence_, and in the others only by depending,
    for its very existence in them, on that one. Now the object of the
    term _being_ is found indeed in accidents, _e.g._ in quantity,
    colour, shape; but certainly it must be applied primarily to
    substance, and to accidents only dependently on the latter: for
    quantity, colour, shape can have being only because the corporeal
    substance possesses these determinations. But this is not at all
    the case with a genus and its species. These differ from the
    genus, not by any such dependence, but by the addition of some
    special perfection to the constituents of the genus; for example,
    in the brute beast sensibility is added to vegetative life, and in
    man intelligence is added to sensibility. Here there is no
    relation of dependence for existence. Even if we considered human
    life as that of which life is principally asserted, we could not
    say that plants and brute beasts so depended for their life on the
    life of man that we could not affirm life of them except as
    dependent on the life of man: as we cannot attribute being to
    accidents except by reason of their dependence on substance. Hence
    it is that we can consider apart, and in itself, life in general,
    and attribute this to all living things without relating it to any
    other being.”( )

    “It might still be objected that the one single being of which we
    may affirm life primarily and principally, ought to be not human
    life, but absolute life. And between this divine life and the life
    of all other beings there is a relation of dependence, which
    reaches even to the very existence of life in these other beings.
    In fact all life depends on the absolute life, not indeed in the
    way accident depends on substance, but in a manner no less real
    and far more excellent. This is entirely true; but what are we to
    conclude from it if not precisely this, which scholasticism
    teaches: that the perfections found in the various species of
    creatures can be affirmed of these in the same sense (_univocé_),
    but that they can be affirmed of God and creatures only
    analogically?”

    “From all of which we can understand why it is that in regard to
    genera and species the analogy is in the things but not in our
    thoughts, while in regard to substance and accidents it is both in
    the things and in our thoughts: a difference which rests not
    solely on our manner of conceiving things, nor _a fortiori_ on
    mere caprice or fancy, but which has its basis in the very nature
    of the things themselves. For though in the former case there is a
    certain analogy in the things themselves, inasmuch as the same
    nature, that of the genus, is realized in the species in different
    ways, still, as we have seen, that is not sufficient, without the
    relation of dependence, to yield a basis for analogy in our
    thoughts. For it is precisely because accident, as a determination
    of substance, presupposes this latter, that being cannot be
    affirmed of accident except as dependent on substance.”

    These paragraphs will have shown with sufficient clearness why we
    should regard being not as an univocal but as an analogical
    concept, when referred to God and creatures, or to substance and
    accident. For the rest, the divergence between the Scotist and the
    Thomist views is not very important, because Scotists also will
    deny that being is a genus of which the infinite and the finite
    would be species; finite and infinite are not _differentiae_
    superadded to being, inasmuch as each of these differs _by its
    whole reality_, and not merely by a determining portion, from the
    other; it is owing to the limitations of our abstractive way of
    understanding reality that we have to conceive the infinite by
    first conceiving being in the abstract, and then mentally
    determining this concept by another, namely, by the concept of
    “infinite mode of being”( ); the infinite, and whatever
    perfections we predicate formally of the infinite, transcend all
    _genera_, _species_ and _differentiae_, because the distinction of
    being into infinite and finite is prior to the distinction into
    genera, species and differentiae; this latter distinction applying
    only to finite, not to infinite being.( )


The observations we have just been making in regard to the analogy of
being are of greater importance than the beginner can be expected to
realize. A proper appreciation of the way in which being or reality is
conceived by the mind to appertain to the data of our experience, is
indispensable to the defence of Theism as against Agnosticism and
Pantheism.

 . REAL BEING AND LOGICAL BEING.—We may next illustrate the notion of
being by approaching it from another standpoint—by examining a fundamental
distinction which may be drawn between _real being_ (_ens reale_) and
_logical being_ (_ens rationis_).

We derive all our knowledge, through external and internal sense
perception, from the domain of actually existing things, these things
including our own selves and our own minds. We form, from the data of
sense-consciousness, by an intellectual process proper, mental
representations of an abstract and universal character, which reveal to us
partial aspects and phases of the natures of things. We have no intuitive
intellectual insight into these natures. It is only by abstracting their
various aspects, by comparing these in judgments, and reaching still
further aspects by inferences, that we progress in our knowledge of
things—gradually, step by step, _discursivé_, _discurrendo_. All this
implies reflection on, and comparison of, our own ideas, our mental views
of things. It involves the processes of defining and classifying,
affirming and denying, abstracting and generalizing, analysing and
synthesizing, comparing and relating in a variety of ways the objects
grasped by our thought. Now in all these complex functions, by which alone
the mind can _interpret rationally_ what is given to it, by which alone,
in other words, it can know reality, the mind necessarily and inevitably
forms for itself (and expresses in intelligible language) a series of
concepts which have for their objects only the _modes_ in which, and the
_relations_ by means of which, it makes such gradual progress in its
interpretation of what is given to it, in its knowledge of the real. These
concepts are called _secundae intentiones mentis_—concepts of the second
order, so to speak. And their objects, the modes and mutual relations of
our _primae intentiones_ or direct concepts, are called _entia
rationis_—logical entities. For example, _abstractness_ is a mode which
affects not the reality which we apprehend intellectually, but the concept
by which we apprehend it. So, too, is the _universality_ of a concept, its
communicability or applicability to an indefinite multitude of similar
realities—the “_intentio universalitatis_,” as it is called—a mode of
concept, not of the realities represented by the latter. So, likewise, is
the _absence_ of other reality than that represented by the concept, the
_relative nothingness or non-being_ by contrast with which the concept is
realized as positive; and the _absolute nothingness or non-being_ which is
the logical correlative of the concept of being; and the static,
unchanging self-identity of the object as conceived in the abstract.( )
These are not modes of reality _as it is_ but _as it is conceived_. Again,
the manifold logical relations which we establish between our
concepts—relations of (extensive or intensive) identity or distinction,
inclusion or inherence, etc.—are logical entities, _entia rationis_:
relations of genus, species, differentia, proprium, accidens; the
affirmative or negative relation between predicate and subject in
judgment;( ) the mutual relations of antecedent and consequent in
inference. Now all these logical entities, or _objecta secundae
intentionis mentis_, are relations established by the mind itself between
its own thoughts; they have, no doubt, a foundation in the real objects of
those thoughts as well as in the constitution and limitations of the mind
itself; but they have themselves, and can have, no other being than that
which they have as products of thought. Their sole being consists in
_being thought of_. They are necessary creations or products of the
thought-process as this goes on in the human mind. We see that it is only
by means of these relations we can progress in understanding things. In
the thought-process we cannot help bringing them to light—and thinking
them after the manner of realities, _per modum entis_. Whatever we think
we must think through the concept of “being”; whatever we conceive we must
conceive as “being”; but on reflection we easily see that such entities as
“nothingness,” “negation or absence or privation of being,”
“universality,” “predicate”—and, in general, all relations established by
our own thought between our own ideas representative of reality—can have
themselves no reality proper, no actual or possible existence, other than
that which they get from the mind in virtue of its making them objects of
its own thought. Hence the scholastic definition of a logical entity or
_ens rationis_ as “that which has objective being merely in the
intellect”: “_illud quod habet esse objective tantum in intellectu, seu
... id quod a ratione excogitatur ut ens, cum tamen in se entitatem non
habeat_”.( ) Of course the mental process by which we think such
entities, the mental state in which they are held in consciousness, is
just as real as any other mental process or state. But the entity which is
thus held in consciousness has and can have no other reality than what it
has by being an object of thought. And this precisely is what
distinguishes it from _real being_, from _reality_; for the latter,
besides the ideal existence it has in the mind which thinks of it, has, or
at least can have, a real existence of its own, independently altogether
of our thinking about it. We assume here, of course—what is established
elsewhere, as against the subjective idealism of phenomenists and the
objective idealism of Berkeley—that the _reality_ of _actual_ things does
not consist in their being perceived or thought of, that their “_esse_” is
not “_percipi_,” that they have a reality other than and independent of
their actual presence to the thought of any human mind. And even purely
possible things, even the creatures of our own fancy, the fictions of
fable and romance, _could_, absolutely speaking and without any
contradiction, have an existence in the actual order, in addition to the
mental existence they receive from those who fancy them. Such entities,
therefore, differ from _entia rationis_; they, too, are _real_ beings.


    What the reality of purely possible things is we shall discuss
    later on. Actually existing things at all events we assume to be
    _given_ to the knowing mind, not to be _created_ by the latter.
    Even in regard to these, however, we must remember that the mind
    in knowing them, in interpreting them, in seeking to penetrate the
    nature of them, is not purely passive; that reality as known to
    us—or, in other words, our knowledge of reality—is the product of
    a twofold factor: the subjective which is the mind, and the
    objective which is the extramental reality acting on, and thus
    revealing itself to, the mind. Hence it is that when we come to
    analyse in detail our knowledge of the nature of things—or, in
    other words, the natures of things as revealed to our minds—it
    will not be always easy to distinguish in each particular case the
    properties, aspects, relations, distinctions, etc., which are
    _real_ (in the sense of being there in the reality independently
    of the consideration of the mind) from those that are merely
    _logical_ (in the sense of being produced and superadded to the
    reality by the mental process itself).( ) Yet it is obviously a
    matter of the very first importance to determine, as far as may be
    possible, to what extent our knowledge of reality is not merely a
    mental _interpretation_, but a mental _construction_, of the
    latter; and whether, if there be a constructive or constitutive
    factor in thought, this should be regarded as interfering with the
    validity of thought as representative of reality. This problem—of
    the relation of the _ens rationis_ to the _ens reale_ in the
    process of cognition—has given rise to discussions which, in
    modern times, have largely contributed to the formation of that
    special branch of philosophical enquiry which is called
    Epistemology. But it must not be imagined that this very problem
    was not discussed, and very widely discussed, by philosophers long
    before the problem of the validity of knowledge assumed the
    prominent place it has won for itself in modern philosophy. Even a
    moderate familiarity with scholastic philosophy will enable the
    student to recognize this problem, in a variety of phases, in the
    discussions of the medieval schoolmen concerning the concepts of
    matter and form, the simplicity and composition of beings, and the
    nature of the various distinctions—whether logical, virtual,
    formal, or real—which the mind either invents or detects in the
    realities it endeavours to understand and explain.


 . REAL BEING AND IDEAL BEING.—The latter of these expressions has a
multiplicity of kindred meanings. We use it here in the sense of “being
_known_,” _i.e._ to signify the “esse _intentionale_,” the mental
presence, which, in the scholastic theory of knowledge, an entity of
whatsoever kind, whether real or logical, must have in the mind of the
knower in order that he be aware of that entity. A mere logical entity, as
we have seen, has and can have no other mode of being than this which
consists in being an object of the mind’s awareness. All real being, too,
when it becomes an object of any kind of human cognition whatsoever—of
intellectual thought, whether direct or reflex; of sense perception,
whether external or internal—must obtain this sort of mental presence or
mental existence: thereby alone can it become an “objectum _cognitum_”.
Only by such mental mirroring, or reproduction, or reconstruction, can
reality become so related and connected with mind as to reveal itself to
mind. Under this peculiar relation which we call cognition, the mind, as
we know from psychology and epistemology, is not passive: if reality
revealed itself immediately, as it is, to a purely passive mind (were such
conceivable), the existence of error would be unaccountable; but the mind
is not passive: under the influence of the reality it forms the
intellectual concept (the _verbum mentale_), or the sense percept (the
_species sensibilis expressa_), in and through which, and by means of
which, it attains to its knowledge of the real.

But prior (ontologically) to this _mental_ existence, and as partial cause
of the latter, there is the _real_ existence or being, which reality has
independently of its being known by any individual human mind. Real being,
then, as distinguished here from ideal being, is that which exists or can
exist extramentally, whether it is known by the human mind or not, _i.e._
whether it exists also mentally or not.


    That there is such real being, apart from the “thought”-being
    whereby the mind is constituted formally knowing, is proved
    elsewhere; as also that this _esse intentionale_ has modes which
    cannot be attributed to the _esse reale_. We merely note these
    points here in order to indicate the errors involved in the
    opposite contentions. Our concepts are characterized by
    abstractness, by a consequent static immutability, by a plurality
    often resulting from purely mental distinctions, by a universality
    which transcends those distinctions and unifies the variety of all
    subordinate concepts in the widest concept of _being_. Now if, for
    example, we attribute the unifying mental mode of universality to
    real being, we must draw the pantheistic conclusion that all real
    being is one: the logical outcome of extreme realism. If, again,
    we transfer purely mental distinctions to the unity of the
    Absolute or Supreme Being, thus making them real, we thereby deny
    infinite perfection to the most perfect being conceivable: an
    error of which some catholic philosophers of the later middle ages
    have been accused with some foundation. If, finally, we identify
    the _esse reale_ with the _esse intentionale_, and this with the
    thought-process itself, we find ourselves at the starting-point of
    Hegelian monism.( )


 . FUNDAMENTAL DISTINCTIONS IN REAL BEING.—Leaving logical and ideal being
aside, and fixing our attention exclusively on real being, we may indicate
here a few of the most fundamental distinctions which experience enables
us to recognize in our study of the universal order of things.

(_a_) _Possible or Potential Being and Actual Being._—The first of these
distinctions is that between possibility and actuality, between that which
can be and that which actually is. For a proper understanding of this
distinction, which will be dealt with presently, it is necessary to note
here the following divisions of _actual_ being, which will be studied in
detail later on.

(_b_) _Infinite Being and Finite Beings._—All people have a sufficiently
clear notion of Infinite Being, or Infinitely Perfect Being: though not
all philosophers are agreed as to how precisely we get this notion, or
whether there actually exists such a being, or whether if such being does
exist we can attain to a certain knowledge of such existence. By infinite
being we mean a being possessing all conceivable perfections in the most
perfect conceivable manner; and by finite beings all such beings as have
actually any conceivable limitation to their perfection. About these
nominal definitions there is no dispute; and scholasticism identifies
their respective objects with _God_ and _creatures_.

(_c_) _Necessary Being and Contingent Beings._—Necessary being we conceive
as that being which exists of necessity: being which if conceived at all
cannot be conceived as non-existent: being in the very concept of which is
essentially involved the concept of actual existence: so that the attempt
to conceive such being as non-existent would be an attempt to conceive
what would be self-contradictory. Contingent being, on the other hand, is
being which is conceived not to exist of necessity: being which may be
conceived as not actually existent: being in the concept of which is not
involved the concept of actual existence. The same observations apply to
this distinction as to the preceding one. It is obvious that any being
which we regard as actual we must regard either as necessary or as
contingent; and, secondly, that necessary being must be considered as
absolutely independent, as having its actual existence _from itself_, by
its own nature; while contingent being must be considered as dependent for
its actual existence on some being _other_ than itself. Hence necessary
being is termed _Ens a se_, contingent being _Ens ab alio_.

(_d_) _Absolute Being and Relative Beings._—In modern philosophy the terms
“absolute” and “relative,” as applied to being, correspond roughly with
the terms “God” and “creatures” in the usage of theistic philosophers. But
the former pair of terms is really of wider application than the latter.
The term _absolute_ means, etymologically, that which is loosed,
unfettered, disengaged or free from bonds (_absolutum_, _ab-solvere_,
_solvo_ = _se-luo_, from λύω): that, therefore, which is not bound up with
anything else, which is in some sense self-sufficing, independent; while
the _relative_ is that which is in some way bound up with something else,
and which is so far not self-sufficing or independent. That, therefore, is
_ontologically_ absolute which is in some sense self-sufficing,
independent of other things, _in its existence_; while the ontologically
relative is that which depends in some real way for its existence on
something else. Again, that is _logically_ absolute which _can be
conceived and known by us without reference to anything else_; while the
logically relative is that which we can conceive and know only through our
knowledge of something else. And since we usually name things according to
the way in which we conceive them, we regard as absolute any being which
is _by itself_ and _of itself_ that which we conceive it to be, or that
which its name implies; and as relative any being which is what its name
implies only _in virtue of some relation_ to something else.( ) Thus, a
man is a _man_ absolutely, while he is a _friend_ only relatively to
others.

It is obvious that the primary and general meaning of the terms “absolute”
and “relative” can be applied and extended in a variety of ways. For
instance, _all_ being may be said to be “relative” _to the knowing mind_,
in the sense that all knowledge involves a transcendental relation of the
known object to the knowing subject. In this widest and most improper
sense even God Himself is relative, not however as being, but as known.
Again, when we apply the same attribute to a variety of things we may see
that it is found in one of them in the most perfect manner conceivable, or
at least in a fuller and higher degree than it is found in the others; and
that it is found in these others only with some sort of subordination to,
and dependence on, the former: we then say that it belongs to this
_primarily_ or _absolutely_, and to the others only _secondarily_ or
_relatively_. This is a less improper application of the terms than in the
preceding case. What we have especially to remember here is that there are
many different kinds of dependence or subordination, all alike giving rise
to the same usage.

Hence, applying the terms absolute and relative to the predicate “being”
or “real” or “reality,” it is obvious in the first place that the
_potential_ as such can be called “being,” or “reality” only in relation
to the _actual_. It is the actual that is being _simpliciter_, _par
excellence_; the potential is so only in relation to this.( ) Again,
_substances_ may be termed beings absolutely, while _accidents_ are beings
only relatively, because of their dependence on substances; though this
relation is quite different from the relation of potential to actual
being. Finally all finite, contingent realities, actual and possible, are
what they are only because of their dependence on the Infinite and
Necessary Being: and hence the former are relative and the latter
absolute; though here again the relation is different from that of
accident to substance, or of potential to actual.

Since the order of being includes all orders, and since a being is
_absolutely_ such-or-such in any order only when that being realizes in
all its fulness and purity such-or-such reality, it follows that the being
which realizes in all its fulness the reality of _being_ is the Absolute
Being in the highest possible sense of this term. This concept of Absolute
Being is the richest and most comprehensive of all possible concepts: it
is the very antithesis of that other concept of “being in general” which
is common to everything and distinguished only from nothingness. It
includes in itself all actual and possible modes and grades and
perfections of finite things, apart from their limitations, embodying all
of them in the one highest and richest concept of that which makes all of
them real and actual, _viz._ the concept of Actuality or Actual Reality
itself.


    Hegel and his followers have involved themselves in a pantheistic
    philosophy by neglecting to distinguish between those two totally
    different concepts.( ) A similar error has also resulted from
    failure to distinguish between the various modes in which being
    that is relative may be dependent on being that is absolute. God
    is the Absolute Being; creatures are relative. So too is substance
    absolute being, compared with accidents as inhering and existing
    in substance. But God is not therefore to be conceived as the one
    all-pervading substance, of which all finite things, all
    phenomena, would be only accidental manifestations.





CHAPTER II. BECOMING AND ITS IMPLICATIONS.


 . THE STATIC AND THE CHANGING.—The things we see around us, the things
which make up the immediate data of our experience, not only _are_ or
_exist_; they also _become_, or _come_ into actual existence; they
_change_; they pass out of actual existence. The abstract notion of being
represents its object to the mind in a static, permanent, changeless,
self-identical condition; but if this condition were an adequate
representation of reality change would be unreal, would be only an
illusion. This is what the Eleatic philosophers of ancient Greece
believed, distinguishing merely between being and nothingness. But they
were mistaken; for change in things is too obviously real to be eliminated
by calling it an illusion: even if it were an illusion, this illusion at
least would have to be accounted for. In order, therefore, to understand
reality we must employ not merely the notion of being (something
_static_), but also the notion of becoming, change, process, appearing and
disappearing (something _kinetic_, and something _dynamic_). In doing so,
however, we must not fall into the error of the opposite extreme from the
Eleatics—by regarding change as the adequate representation of reality.
This is what Heraclitus and the later Ionians did: holding that nothing
_is_, that all _becomes_ (πάντα ρέι), that change is all reality, that the
stable, the permanent, is non-existent, unreal, an illusion. This too is
false; for change would be unintelligible without at least an abiding
_law_ of change, a permanent _principle_ of some sort; which, in turn,
involves the reality of some sort of abiding, stable, permanent being.

We must then—with Aristotle, as against both of those one-sided
conceptions—hold to the reality both of being and of becoming; and proceed
to see how the stable and the changing can both be real.

To convince ourselves that they are both real, very little reflection is
needed. We have actual experience of both those elements of reality in our
consciousness and memory of our own selves. Every human individual in the
enjoyment of his mental faculties knows himself as an abiding,
self-identical being, yet as constantly undergoing real changes; so that
throughout his life he is really the same being, though just as certainly
he really changes. In external nature, too, we observe on the one hand
innumerable processes of growth and decay, of motion and interaction; and
on the other hand a similarly all-pervading element of sameness or
identity amid all this never-ending change.

 . THE POTENTIAL AND THE ACTUAL. (_a_) POSSIBILITY, ABSOLUTE, RELATIVE,
AND ADEQUATE.—It is from our experience of actuality and change that we
derive not only our notion of temporal duration, but also our notion of
_potential being_ or _possibility_, as distinct from that of _actual
being_ or _actuality_. It is from our experience of what actually exists
that we are able to determine what can, and what cannot exist. We know
from experience what gold is, and what a tower is; and that it is
intrinsically possible for a golden tower to exist, that such an object of
thought involves no contradiction, that therefore its existence is not
impossible, even though it may never actually exist as a fact. Similarly,
we know from experience what a square is, and what a circle is; and that
it is intrinsically impossible for a square circle to exist, that such an
object of thought involves a contradiction, that therefore not only is
such an object never actually existent in fact, but that it is in no sense
real, in no way possible.

Thus, _intrinsic_ (or _objective_, _absolute_, _logical_, _metaphysical_)
possibility is the mere non-repugnance of an object of thought to actual
existence. Any being or object of thought that is conceivable in this way,
that can be conceived as capable of actually existing, is called
intrinsically (or objectively, absolutely, logically, metaphysically)
possible being. The absence of such intrinsic capability of actual
existence gives us the notion of the intrinsically (objectively,
absolutely, logically, metaphysically) impossible. We shall return to
these notions again. They are necessary here for the understanding of real
change in the actual universe.

Fixing our attention now upon the real changes which characterize the data
of our experience, let us inquire what conditions are necessary in order
that an intrinsically possible object of thought become here and now an
actual being. It matters not whether we select an example from the domain
of organic nature, of inorganic nature, or of art—whether it be an oak, or
an iceberg, or a statue. In order that there be here and now an actual
oak-tree, it is necessary not only ( ) that such an object be
intrinsically possible, but ( ) that there have been planted here an
actual acorn, _i.e._ an actual being having in it subjectively and really
the passive potentiality of developing into an actual oak-tree, and ( )
that there be in the actual things around the acorn active powers or
forces capable of so influencing the latent, passive potentiality of the
acorn as gradually to evolve the oak-tree therefrom. So, too, for the ( )
intrinsically possible iceberg, there are needed ( ) water capable of
becoming ice, and ( ) natural powers or forces capable of forming it into
ice and setting this adrift in the ocean. And for the ( ) intrinsically
possible statue there are needed ( ) the block of marble or other material
capable of becoming a statue, and ( ) the sculptor having the power to
mould this material into an actual statue.

In order, therefore, that a thing which is not now actual, but only
intrinsically or absolutely possible, become actual, there must actually
exist some being or beings endowed with the _active power or potency_ of
making this possible thing actual. The latter is then said to be
_relatively, extrinsically_ possible—in relation to such being or beings.
And obviously a thing may be possible relatively to the power of one
being, and not possible relatively to lesser power of another being: the
statue that is intrinsically possible in the block of marble, may be
extrinsically possible relatively to the skilled sculptor, but not
relatively to the unskilled person who is not a sculptor.

Furthermore, relatively to the same agent or agents, the production of a
given effect, the doing of a given thing, is said to be _physically_
possible if it can be brought about by such agents acting according to the
ordinary course of nature; if, in other words they have the physical power
to do it. Otherwise it is said to be physically impossible, even though
metaphysically or intrinsically possible, _e.g._ it is physically
impossible for a dead person to come to life again. A thing is said to be
_morally_ possible, in reference to free and responsible agents, if they
can do it without unreasonable inconvenience; otherwise it is considered
as morally impossible, even though it be both physically and
metaphysically possible: as often happens in regard to the fulfilment of
one’s obligations.

That which is _both intrinsically and extrinsically possible_ is said to
be _adequately possible_. Whatever is intrinsically possible is also
extrinsically possible in relation to God, who is _Almighty_,
_Omnipotent_.

 . (_b_) SUBJECTIVE “POTENTIA,” ACTIVE AND PASSIVE.—Furthermore, we
conceive the Infinite Being, Almighty God, as capable of _creating_, or
producing actual being _from nothingness_, _i.e._ without any actually
pre-existing material out of whose passive potentiality the actual being
would be developed. Creative power or activity does not need any
pre-existing subject on which to exercise its influence, any subject in
whose _passive potentiality_ the thing to be created is antecedently
implicit.

But all other power, all activity of created causes, does require some
such actually existing subject. If we examine the activities of the
agencies that fall within our direct experience, whether in external
nature or in our own selves, we shall find that in no case does their
operative influence or causality extend beyond the production of changes
in existing being, or attain to the production of new actual being out of
nothingness. The forces of nature cannot produce an oak without an acorn,
or an iceberg without water; nor can the sculptor produce a statue except
from some pre-existing material.


    The _natural_ passive potentiality of things is, moreover, limited
    in reference to the active powers of the created universe. These,
    for example, can educe life from the passive potentiality of
    inorganic matter, but only by assimilating this matter into a
    living organism: they cannot restore life to a human corpse; yet
    the latter has in it the capacity to be restored to life by the
    direct influence of the Author of Nature. This special and
    supernatural potentiality in created things, under the influence
    of Omnipotence, is known as _potentia obedientalis_.( )


This consideration will help us to realize that all reality which is
produced by change, and subject to change, is essentially a mixture of
_becoming_ and _being_, of _potential_ and _actual_. The reality of such
being is not _tota simul_. Only immutable being, whose duration is
_eternal_, has its reality _tota simul_: it alone is _purely actual_, the
“_Actus Purus_”; and its duration is one eternal “_now_,” without
beginning, end, or succession. But mutable being, whose duration in actual
existence is measured by _time_, is actualized only successively: its
actuality at any particular instant does not embody the whole of its
reality: this latter includes also a “_was_” and “_will be_”; the thing
was _potentially_ what it now is _actually_, and it will become actually
something which it now is only potentially; nor shall we have understood
even moderately the nature or essence of any mutable being—an oak-tree,
for example—until we have grasped the fact that the whole reality of its
nature embraces more than what we find of it actually existing at any
given instant of its existence. In other words, we have to bear in mind
that the reality of such a being is not pure actuality but a mixture of
potential and actual: that it is an _actus non-purus_, or an _actus
mixtus_.

We have to note well that the _potential being_ of a thing is something
_real_—that it is not merely a _modus loquendi_, or a _modus
intelligendi_. The oak is in the acorn in some true and real sense: the
potentiality of the oak is something real in the acorn: if it were not so,
if it were nothing real in the acorn, we could say with equal truth that a
man or a horse or a house is potentially in the acorn; or, again with
equal truth, that the oak is potentially in a mustard-seed, or a grain of
corn, or a pebble, or a drop of water. Therefore the oak is _really_ in
the acorn—not actually but potentially, _potentia passiva_.

The oak-tree is also really in those _active_ forces of nature whose
influence on the acorn develop the latter into an actual oak-tree: it is
in those causes not actually, of course, but _virtually_, for they possess
in themselves the _operative power_—_potentia activa sive operativa_—to
educe the oak-tree out of the acorn. These two potential conditions of a
being—in the active causes which produce it, and in the pre-existing
actual thing or things from which it is produced—are called each a real or
subjective potency, _potentia realis_, or _potentia subjectiva_, in
distinction from the mere logical or objective possibility of such a
being.

And just as the passive potentiality of the statue is something real in
the block of marble, though distinct from the actuality of the statue and
from the process by which this is actualized, so is the active power of
making the statue something real in the sculptor, though distinct from the
operation by which he makes the statue. If an agent’s _power_ to act, to
produce change, were not a reality in the agent, a reality distinct from
the _action_ of the latter; or if a being’s capacity to undergo change,
and thereby to become something other, were not a reality distinct from
the process of change, and from the actual result of this process—it would
follow not only that the actual alone is real, and the merely possible or
potential unreal, but also that no change can be real, that nothing can
really become, and nothing really disappear.( )

 . (_c_) ACTUALITY: ITS RELATION TO POTENTIALITY.—It is from our
experience of change in the world that we derive our notions of the
potential and the actual, of active power and passive potentiality. The
term “act” has primarily the same meaning as “action,” “operation,” that
process by which a change is wrought. But the Latin word _actus_ (Gr.
ἐνέργεια, ἐντελέχεια) means rather that which is achieved by the _actio_,
that which is the correlative and complement of the passive potentiality,
the actuality of this latter: that by which potential being is rendered
formally actual, and, by way of consequence, this actual being itself.
“_Potentia activa_” and its correlative “_actus_” might, perhaps, be
appropriately rendered by “_power_” (_potestas agendi_) and “_action_” or
“_operation_”; “_potentia passiva_” and its correlative “_actus_,” by
“_potentiality_” and “_actuality_” respectively.

In these correlatives, the notion underlying the term “actual” is
manifestly the notion of something completed, achieved, perfected—as
compared with that of something incomplete, imperfect, determinable, which
is the notion of the potential. Hence the notions of _potentia_ and
_actus_ have been extended widely beyond their primary signification of
power to act and the exercise of this power. Such pairs of correlatives as
the determinable and the determined, the perfectible and the perfected,
the undeveloped or less developed and the more developed, the generic and
the specific, are all conceived under the aspect of this widest relation
of the potential to the actual. And since we can distinguish successive
stages in any process of development, or an order of logical sequence
among the contents of our concept of any concrete reality, it follows that
what will be conceived as an _actus_ in one relation will be conceived as
a _potentia_ in another. Thus, the disposition of any faculty—as, for
example, the scientific habit in the intellect—is an _actus_ or perfection
of the faculty regarded as a _potentia_; but it is itself a _potentia_
which is actualized in the _operation_ of actually studying. This
illustrates the distinction commonly drawn between an “_actus primus_” and
an “_actus secundus_” in any particular order or line of reality: the
_actus primus_ is that which presupposes no prior actuality in the same
order; the _actus secundus_ is that which does presuppose another. The act
of knowing is an _actus secundus_ which presupposes the cognitive faculty
as an _actus primus_: the faculty being the _first_ or fundamental
equipment of the soul in relation to knowledge. Hence the child is said to
have knowledge “_in actu primo_” as having the faculty of reason; and the
student to have knowledge “_in actu secundo_” as exercising this faculty.

The _actus_ or perfecting principles of which we have spoken so far are
all conceived as presupposing an existing subject on which they supervene.
They are therefore _accidents_ as distinct from _substantial constitutive_
principles of this subject; and they are therefore called _accidental_
actualities, _actus_ “_accidentales_”. But the actual existence of a being
is also conceived as the complement and correlative of its essence: as
that which makes the latter actual, thus transferring it from the state of
mere possibility. Hence existence also is called an _actus_ or actuality:
the _actus_ “_existentialis_,” to distinguish it from the existing thing’s
activities and other subsequently acquired characters. In reference to
these existence is a “first actuality”—“_Esse est actus primus_”; “_Prius
est esse quam agere_”: “Existence is the first actuality”; “Action
presupposes existence”—while each of these in reference to existence, is a
“second actuality,” an _actus secundus_.

When, furthermore, we proceed to examine the constitutive principles
essential to any being in the concrete, we may be able to distinguish
between principles which are determinable, passive and persistent
throughout all essential change of that being, and others which are
determining, specifying, differentiating principles. In water, for
example, we may distinguish the passive underlying principle which
persists throughout the decomposition of water into oxygen and hydrogen,
from the active specifying principle which gives that substratum its
specific nature as water. The former or material principle (ὕλη,
_materia_) is _potential_, compared with the latter or formal principle
(μορφή, εἶδος, ἐντελέχεια, _forma_, _species_, _actus_) as _actual_. The
concept of _actus_ is thus applied to the essence itself: the _actus_
“_essentialis_” or “_formalis_” of a thing is that which we conceive to be
the ultimate, completing and determining principle of the essence or
nature of that thing. In reference to this as well as the other
constitutive principles of the thing, the actual existence of the thing is
a “second actuality,” an _actus secundus_.

In fact all the constitutive principles of the essence of any existing
thing, and all the properties and attributes involved in the essence or
necessarily connected with the essence, must all alike be conceived as
logically antecedent to the existential _actus_ whereby they are
constituted something in the actual order, and not mere possible objects
of our thought. And from this point of view the existence of a thing is
called the ultimate actualization of its essence. Hence the scholastic
aphorism: “_Esse est ultimus actus rei_”.

The term _actus_ may designate that complement of reality by which
potential being is made actual (_actus_ “_actuans_”), or this actual being
itself (_actus_ “_simpliciter dictus_”). In the latter sense we have
already distinguished the Being that is immutable, the Being of God, as
the _Actus Purus_, from the being of all mutable things, which latter
being is necessarily a mixture of potential and actual, an _actus mixtus_.

Now if the essences of corporeal things are composite, if they are
constituted by the union of some determining, formative principle with a
determinable, passive principle—of “form” with “matter,” in scholastic
terminology—we may call these formative principles _actus_
“_informantes_”; and if these cannot actually exist except in union with a
material principle they may be called actus “_non-subsistentes_”: _e.g._,
the formative principle or “_forma substantialis_” of water, or the vital
principle of a plant. If, on the other hand, there exist essences which,
being simple, do not actualize any material, determinable principle, but
subsist independently of any such, they are called _actus_
“_non-informantes_,” or _actus_ “_subsistentes_”. Such, for example, are
God, and pure spirits whose existence is known from revelation. Finally,
there may be a kind of actual essence which, though it naturally
actualizes a material principle _de facto_, can nevertheless continue to
subsist without this latter: such an actual being would be at once an
_actus informans_ and an _actus subsistens_; and such, in fact, is the
human soul.

Throughout all distinctions between the potential and the actual there
runs the conception of _the actual as something more perfect than the
potential_. There is in the actual something positive and real over and
above what is in the potential. This is an ultimate fact in our analysis;
and its importance will be realized when we come to apply the notions we
have been explaining to the study of change.

The notion of grades of perfection in things is one with which everyone is
familiar. We naturally conceive some beings as higher upon the scale of
reality than others; as having “more” reality, so to speak—not
necessarily, of course, in the literal sense of size or quantity—than
others; as being more perfect, nobler, of greater worth, value, dignity,
excellence, than others. Thus we regard the infinite as more perfect than
the finite, spiritual beings as nobler than material beings, man as a
higher order of being than the brute beast, this again as surpassing the
whole vegetable kingdom, the lowest form of life as higher on the scale of
being than inorganic matter, the substance-mode of being as superior to
all accident-modes, the actualized state of a being as more perfect than
its potential state, _i.e._ as existing in its material, efficient and
ideal or exemplar causes. The grounds and significance of this mental
appreciation of relative values in things must be discussed elsewhere. We
refer to it here in order to point out another scholastic aphorism,
according to which the higher a thing is in the scale of actual being, and
the more perfect it is accordingly, the more efficient it will also be as
a principle of action, the more powerful as a cause in the production of
changes in other things, the more operative in actualizing their passive
potentialities; and conversely, the less actual a thing is, and therefore
the more imperfect, the greater its passive capacity will be to undergo
the influence of agencies that are actual and operative around it. “As
passive potentiality,” says St. Thomas,( ) “is the mark of potential
being, so active power is the mark of actual being. For a thing acts, in
so far as it is actual; but is acted on, so far as it is potential.” Our
knowledge of the nature of things is in fact exclusively based on our
knowledge of their activities: we have no other key to the knowledge of
what a thing is than our knowledge of what it does: “_Operari sequitur
esse_”: “_Qualis est operatio talis est natura_”—“Acting follows being”:
“Conduct is the key to nature”.

A being that is active or operative in the production of a change is said
to be the efficient cause of the change, the latter being termed the
effect. Now the greater the change, _i.e._ the higher and more perfect be
the grade of reality that is actualized in the change, the higher too in
the scale of being must be the efficient cause of that change. There must
be a proportion in degree of perfection or reality between effect and
cause. The former cannot exceed in actual perfection the active power, and
therefore the actual being, of the latter. This is so because we conceive
the effect as being produced or actualized _through the operative
influence_ of the cause, and _with real dependence_ on this latter; and it
is inconceivable that a cause should have power to actualize other being,
distinct from itself, which would be of a higher grade of excellence than
itself. The nature of efficient causality, of the influence by which the
cause is related to its effect, is not easy to determine; it will be
discussed at a subsequent stage of our investigations (ch. xi.); but
whatever it be, a little reflection should convince us of the truth of the
principle just stated: that an effect cannot be more perfect than its
cause. The mediæval scholastics embodied this truth in the formula: _Nemo
dat quod non habet_—a formula which we must not interpret in the more
restricted and literal sense of the words _giving_ and _having_, lest we
be met with the obvious objection that it is by no means necessary for a
boy to have a black eye himself in order to give one to his neighbour!
What the formula means is that an agent cannot give to, or produce in, any
potential subject, receptive of its causal influence, an actuality which
it does not itself possess virtually, or in its active power: that no
actuality surpassing in excellence the actual perfection of the cause
itself can be found thus virtually in the active power of the latter.
There is no question of the cause or agent transferring bodily as it were
a part of its own actuality to the subject which is undergoing change( );
nor will such crude imagination images help us to understand what real
change, under the influence of efficient causality, involves.( ) An
analysis of change will enable us to appreciate more fully the real
difficulty of explaining it, and the futility of any attempt to account
for it without admitting the real, objective validity of the notions of
actual and potential being, of active powers or forces and passive
potentialities in the things that are subject to change.

 . ANALYSIS OF CHANGE.—_Change_ (_Mutatio_, _Motus_, μεταβολή, κίνησις)
is one of those simplest concepts which cannot be defined. We may describe
it, however, as _the transition of a being from one state to another_. If
one thing entirely disappeared and another were substituted for it, we
should not regard the former as having been changed into the latter. When
one thing is put in the place of another, each, no doubt, undergoes a
change of place, but neither is changed into the other. So, also, if we
were to conceive a thing as absolutely ceasing to exist, as lapsing into
nothingness at a given instant, and another as coming into existence out
of nothingness at the same instant (and in the same place), we should not
consider this double event as constituting a real change of the former
thing into the latter. And although our _senses_ cannot testify to
anything beyond _sequence_ in sense phenomena, our _reason_ detects in
real change something other than a total substitution of things for one
another, or continuous total cessations and inceptions of existence in
things. No doubt, if we conceive the whole phenomenal or perceptible
universe and all the beings which constitute this universe as essentially
contingent, and therefore dependent for their reality and their actual
existence on a Supreme, Necessary Being who created and conserves them,
who at any time may cease to conserve any of them, and produce other and
new beings _out of nothingness_, then such absolute cessations and
inceptions of existence in the world would not be impossible. God might
_annihilate_, _i.e._ cease to conserve in existence, this or that
contingent being at any instant, and at any instant _create_ a new
contingent being, _i.e._ produce it in its totality from no pre-existing
material. But there is no reason to suppose that this is what is
constantly taking place in Nature: that all change is simply a series of
annihilations and creations. On the contrary, the modes of being which
appear and disappear in real change, in the transition of anything from
one state to a really different state of being, do not appear _de novo_,
_ex nihilo_, as absolute beginnings out of nothingness; or disappear
_totaliter_, _in nihilum_, as absolute endings or lapses of reality into
nothingness. The real changes which take place in Nature are due to the
operation of natural causes. These causes, being finite in their operative
powers, cannot create, _i.e._ produce new being from nothingness. They
can, however, with the concurrence of the Omnipotent Being, modify
existing modes of being, _i.e._ make actual what was only potential in
these latter. The notion of change is not verified in the conception of
successive annihilations and creations; for there is involved in the
former concept not merely the notion of a real difference between the two
_actual_ states, that before and that after the change, but also the
notion of some _potential_ reality persisting throughout the change,
something capable of being actually so and so before the change and
actually otherwise after the change. For real change, therefore, we
require ( ) two positive and really different states of the same being, a
“_terminus a quo_” and a “_terminus ad quem_”; and ( ) a real process of
transition whereby something potential becomes actual. In creation there
is no real and positive _terminus a quo_; in annihilation there is no real
and positive _terminus ad quem_; these therefore are not changes in the
proper sense of the term. Sometimes, too, change is affirmed, by purely
extrinsic denomination, of a thing in which there is no real change, but
only a relation to some other really changing thing. In this sense when an
object unknown or unthought of becomes the actual object of somebody’s
thought or cognition, it is said to “change,” though the transition from
“unknown” to “known” involves no real change of state in the object, but
only in the knowing subject. If thought were in any true sense
“constitutive” of reality, as many modern philosophers contend, the change
in the object would of course be real.

Since, therefore, change consists in this, that a thing which is actually
in a given state ceases to be actually such and begins to be actually in
another state, it is obvious that there persists throughout the process
some reality which is in itself potential and indifferent to either actual
state; and that, moreover, something which was actual disappears, while
some new actuality appears, in this persisting potentiality. The abiding
potential principle is called the _matter_ or _subject_ of the change; the
transient actualizing principles are called _forms_. Not all these “forms”
which precede or result from change are necessarily positive entities in
themselves: they may be mere _privations_ of other forms (“_privatio_,”
στέρησις): not all changes result in the acquisition of a new degree of
positive actual being; some result in loss of perfection or actuality.
Still, even in these cases, the state characterized by the less perfect
degree of actuality has a determinate actual grade of being which is
proper to itself, and which, as such, is not found actually, but only
potentially, in the state characterized by the more perfect degree of
actuality. When, then, a being changes from a more perfect to a less
perfect state, the actuality of this less perfect state cannot be
adequately accounted for by seeking it in the antecedent and more perfect
state: it is not in this latter state _actually_, but only _potentially_;
nor do we account for it by saying that it is “equivalently” in the
greater actuality of the latter state: the two actualizing principles are
really distinct, and neither is wholly or even partially the other. The
significance of this consideration will appear presently in connection
with the scholastic axiom: _Quidquid movetur ab alio movetur_.

Meanwhile we must guard against conceiving the potential or material
factor in change as a sort of actual but hidden core of reality which
itself persists unchanged throughout; and the formative or actualizing
factors as superficially adorning this substratum by constantly replacing
one another. Such a substitution of imagination images for intellectual
thought will not help, but rather hinder, all accurate analysis. It is not
the potential or material factor in things that changes, nor yet the
actualizing or formal factors, but the things themselves; and if “things”
are subject to “real change” it is manifest that this fact can be made
intelligible, if at all, only by intellectually analysing the things and
their changes into constitutive principles or factors which are nor
themselves “things” or “changes”. Were we to arrive only at principles of
the latter sort, so far from explaining anything we would really only have
pushed back the problem a step farther. It may be that none of the
attempts yet made by philosophers or scientists to offer an ultimate
explanation of change is entirely satisfactory,—the scholastic explanation
will be gradually outlined in these pages,—but it will be of advantage at
least to recognize the shortcomings of theories that are certainly
inadequate.

We are now in a position to state and explain the important scholastic
aphorism embodying what has been called the Principle of Change
(“_Principium Motus_”): _Quidquid movetur, ab alio movetur_: “Whatever
undergoes change is changed by something else”. The term _motus_ is here
taken in the wide sense of any real transition from potentiality to
actuality, as is evident from the alternative statements of the same
principle: _Nihil potest seipsum reducere e potentia in actum_: “Nothing
can reduce itself from potentiality to actuality,” or, again, _Potentia,
qua talis, nequit per semetipsam ad actum reduci, sed reducitur ab alio
principio in actu_: “The potential as such cannot be reduced by itself to
the actual, but only by some other already actual principle”.( ) This
assertion, rightly understood, is self-evidently true; for the state of
passive potentiality, as such, involves the absence of the correlative
actuality in the potential subject; and since the actual, as such,
involves a perfection which is not in the potential, the latter cannot
confer upon itself this perfection: nothing can be the adequate principle
or source of a perfection which is not in this principle or source: _nemo
dat quod non habet_.

We have already anticipated the objection arising from the consideration
that the state resulting from a change is sometimes in its totality less
perfect than the state which existed prior to the change. Even in such
cases there results from the change a new actuality which was not in the
prior state, and which cannot be conceived as a mere part or residue of
the latter, or regarded as equivalently contained in the latter. Even
granting, as we must, that the net result of such a change is a loss of
actuality or perfection in the subject of change, still there is always a
gain which is not accounted for by the loss; there is always a new actual
state which, as such, was not in the original state.

A more obvious objection to the principle arises from the consideration of
vital action; but it is based on a misunderstanding of the principle under
discussion. Living things, it is objected, move themselves: their _vital_
action is spontaneous and immanent: originating within themselves, it has
its term too within themselves, resulting in their gradual development,
growth, increase of actuality and perfection. Therefore it would appear
that they move and perfect themselves; and hence the so-called “principle
of change” is not true universally.

In reply to all this we admit that vital action is immanent, remaining
within the agent to perfect the latter; also that it is spontaneous,
inasmuch as when the agent is actually exercising vital functions it need
not be actually undergoing the causal influence of any other created
agent, or actually dependent on any such agent. But it must, nevertheless,
in such action, be dependent on, and influenced by, _some actual being
other than itself_. And the reason is obvious: If by such action it
increases its own actual perfection, and becomes actually other than it
was before such action, then it cannot have given itself the actuality of
this perfection, which it possessed before only potentially. No doubt, it
is not merely passively potential in regard to such actual perfections, as
is the case in non-vital change which results in the subject from the
transitive action of some outside cause upon the latter. The living thing
has the active power of causing or producing in itself these actual
perfections: there is interaction between its vital parts: through one
organ or faculty it acts upon another, thus educing an actuality, a new
perfection, in this other, and thus developing and perfecting its own
being. But even considered as active it cannot be the adequate cause of
the actuality acquired through the change. If this actuality is something
_really_ over and above the reality of its active and passive potential
principles, then it remains true that change implies the influence of an
actual being other than the subject changed: _Quid quid movetur, ab alio
movetur_.


    The question here arises, not only in reference to vital agents,
    but to _all finite, created causes_: Does the active cause of
    change (together with the passive potentiality of the subject of
    change, whether this subject be the agent itself as in immanent
    activity, or something other than the agent as in transitive
    activity),—does this active power account _adequately_ for the new
    actuality educed in the change? It obviously does not; for the
    actuality acquired in the change is, as such, a new entity, a new
    perfection, in some degree positively surpassing the total reality
    of the combined active powers and passive potentialities which it
    replaces. In other words, if the actuality resulting from the
    change is not to be found in the immediate active and passive
    antecedents of the change, then we are inevitably referred, for an
    adequate explanation of this actuality, to some actual being above
    and beyond these antecedents. And to what sort of actual being are
    we referred? To a being in which the actuality of the effect
    resides only in the same way as it resides in the immediate active
    and passive antecedents of the change, that is _potentially_? No;
    for this would be useless, merely pushing the difficulty one step
    farther back. We are obliged rather to infer the existence of an
    Actual Being in whom the actuality of the said effect resides
    _actually_: not formally, of course, as it exists in itself when
    it is produced through the change; but eminently, _eminenter_, in
    such a way that its actualization outside Himself and under His
    influence does not involve in Him any loss of perfection, any
    increase of perfection, or any manner of change whatsoever. We are
    compelled in this way to infer, from the existence of change in
    the universe of our direct experience, the existence of a
    transcendent Immovable Prime Mover, a _Primum Movens Immobile_.
    All the active causes or principles of change which fall under our
    notice in the universe of direct experience are themselves subject
    to change. None of them causes change in any other thing without
    itself undergoing change. The active power of finite causes is
    itself finite. By educing the potentiality of other things into
    actuality they gradually use up their own energy; they diminish
    and lose their active power of producing effects: this belongs to
    the very nature of finite causes as such. Moreover, they are
    themselves passive as well as active; interaction is universal
    among the finite causes which constitute the universe of our
    direct experience: they all alike have passive potentiality and
    undergo change. Now, if any one finite cause in this system cannot
    adequately account for the new actuality evolved from the
    potential in any single process of change, neither can the whole
    system adequately account for it. What is true of them
    distributively is true of them taken all together when there is
    question of what belongs to their nature; and the fact that their
    active powers and passive potentialities _fall short_ of the
    actuality of the effects we attribute to them is a fact that
    appertains to their very nature as finite things. The phenomenon
    of continuous change in the universe involves the continuous
    appearance of _new actual being_. To account for this constant
    stream of actuality we are of necessity carried beyond the system
    of finite, changing being itself; we are forced to infer the
    existence of a source and principle which must itself be purely
    actual and exempt from all change—a Being who can cause all the
    actuality that results from change without losing or gaining or
    changing in any way Himself, because He possesses all finite
    actuality in Himself in a supereminent manner which transcends all
    the efforts of finite human intelligence to comprehend or
    characterize in any adequate or positive manner. The scholastics
    expressed this in the simple aphorism: _Omne novum ens est a Deo_.
    And it is the realization of this profound truth that underlies
    their teaching on the necessity of the Divine _Concursus_, _i.e._
    the influence of the Infinite First Cause or Prime Mover
    permeating the efficiency of all finite or created causes. Here,
    for example, is a brief recent statement of that doctrine:—

    “If we must admit a causal influence of these things [of direct
    experience] on one another, then a closer examination will
    convince us that a finite thing can never be the adequate cause of
    any effect, but is always, metaphysically regarded, only a
    part-cause, ever needing to be completed by another cause. Every
    effect is—at least under one aspect, at least as an
    effect—something new, something that was not there before. Even
    were the effect contained, whether formally or virtually, in the
    cause, it is certainly not identical with this latter, for if it
    were there would be no causality, nothing would ‘happen’. In all
    causing and happening, something which was heretofore only
    possible, becomes real and actual. But things cannot determine
    themselves to influence others, or to receive the influence of
    others, since they are not dependent in their being on one
    another. Hence the necessary inference that all being, all
    happening, all change, requires the concurrence of an Absolute
    Principle of being. When two things act on each other the Absolute
    Being must work in and with them, the same Absolute Being in
    both—to relate them to each other, and supplement their natural
    insufficiency.”

    “Such is the profound teaching about the Divine Concursus with
    every creature.... God works in all and with all. He permeates all
    reality, everywhere; there is no being beyond Him or independent
    of His conserving and concurring power. Just as creatures are
    brought into being only through God’s omnipotence, and of
    themselves have no independent reality, so do they need the
    self-same ever-present, all-sustaining power to continue in this
    being and develop it by their activity. Every event in Nature is a
    transitory, passing phenomenon, so bound up with conditions and
    circumstances that it must disappear to give place to some other.
    How could a mode of being so incomplete discharge its function in
    existence without the concurrence of the First Cause?”( )


We have seen now that _in the real order_ the potential presupposes the
actual; for the potential cannot actualize itself, but can be actualized
only by the action of some already actual being. Nor can we avoid this
consequence by supposing the potential being to have had no actual
beginning in time, but to be eternally in process of actualization; for
even so, it must be eternally actualized _by some other actual being_—a
position which Aristotle and some scholastics admit to be possible.
Whether, then, we conceive the actualization as beginning in time or as
proceeding from all eternity, it is self-contradictory to suppose the
potential as capable of actualizing itself.

It is likewise true that the actual precedes the possible _in the order of
our knowledge_. The concept of a thing as possible presupposes the concept
of that thing as actual; for the possible is understood to be possible
only by its intelligible relation to actual existence. This is evidently
true of extrinsic possibility; but our knowledge even of the intrinsic
possibility of a thing cannot be the first knowledge we possess in the
order of time. Our first knowledge is of the actual; for the mind’s first
cognitive act must have for object either itself or something not itself.
But it knows itself as a consciously acting and therefore actual being.
And it comes to know things other than itself only by the fact that such
other things act upon it either immediately or mediately through
sense-consciousness; so that in every hypothesis its first known object is
something actual.( )


    The priority of the actual as compared with the potential in the
    real order, suggests a proof of the existence of God in the manner
    indicated above. It also affords a refutation of Hegelian monism.
    The conception of the world, including all the phenomena of mind
    and matter, as the gradual self-manifestation or evolution of a
    potential being eternally actualizing itself, is a
    self-contradictory conception. Scholastics rightly maintain that
    the realities from which we derive our first most abstract and
    transcendental notion of being in general, are actual realities.
    Hegelians seize on the object of this notion, identify it with
    pure thought, proclaim it the sole reality, and endow it with the
    power of becoming actually everything. It is manifest, therefore,
    that they endow purely potential being with the power of
    actualizing itself.

    Nor can they fairly avoid this charge by pointing out that
    although their starting-point is not actual being (with which the
    scholastic philosophy of being commences), yet neither is it
    possible or potential being, but being which has neither of these
    determinations, being which abstracts from both, like the real
    being of the scholastics ( ,  ). For though real being can be _an
    object of abstract human thought_ without either of the predicates
    “existent” or “non-existent,” yet it cannot be anything _in the
    real order_ without either of them. There it must be either
    actually existent or else merely potential. But Hegelians claim
    absolutely indeterminate being to be _as such_ something in the
    real order; and though they try to distinguish it from potential
    being they nevertheless think of it as potential being, for they
    distinctly and repeatedly declare that it can become all things,
    and does become all things, and is constantly, eternally
    transforming itself by an internal dialectic process into the
    phenomena which constitute the worlds of mind and matter.
    Contrasting it with the abstract “inert” being which they conceive
    to be the object of the traditional metaphysics, they endow
    “indeterminate being” with the active power of producing, and the
    passive potentiality of becoming, actually everything. Thus, in
    order to show _a priori_ how this indeterminate being must evolve
    itself by internal logical necessity into the world of our direct
    and immediate experience, they suppose it to be subject to change
    and to be at the same time self-actualizing, in direct opposition
    to the axiom that potential reality, reality which is subject to
    change, cannot actualize itself: _Quidquid movetur ab alio
    moveatur oportet_.


 . KINDS OF CHANGE.—Following Aristotle,( ) we may recognize a broad and
clear distinction between four great classes of change (μεταβολή,
_mutatio_) in the phenomena of our sense experience: local change (κίνησις
κατὰ τόπον, φορά, _latio_); quantitative change (κατὰ τὸ πόσον, ἀύζησις ἤ
φθίσις, _augmentatio vel diminutio_); qualitative change (κατὰ τὸ ποίον,
ἀλλοίωσις, _alteratio_); and substantial change (κατ᾽ οὐσίαν, γένεσις ἤ
φθορά). The three former are accidental, _i.e._ do not reach or affect the
essence or substance of the thing that is changed; the fourth is
substantial, a change of essence. Substantial change is regarded as taking
place instantaneously, as soon as the condition brought about by the
accidental changes leading up to it becomes naturally incompatible with
the essence or nature of the subject. The accidental changes, on the other
hand, are regarded as taking place gradually, as realizing and involving a
succession of states or conditions in the subject. These changes,
especially when they take place in corporeal things, are properly
described as movement or motion (_motus_, _motio_). By movement or motion
in the strict sense we therefore mean any change which takes place
gradually or successively in a corporeal thing. It is only in a wider and
improper sense that these terms are sometimes applied to activity of
whatsoever kind, even of spiritual beings. In this sense we speak of
thoughts, volitions, etc., as movements of the soul, _motus animae_; or of
God as the Prime Mover ever in motion, the _Primum Movens semper in motu_.

With local change in material things, as also with quantitative change,
growth and diminution of quantity (mass and volume), everyone is perfectly
familiar. From the earliest times, moreover, we find both in science and
philosophy the conception of matter as composed of, and divisible into,
ultimate particles, themselves supposed to admit of no further real
division, and hence called _atoms_ (ἄ-τομος, τέμνω). From the days of
Grecian atomism men have attempted to show that all change in the Universe
is ultimately reducible to changes of place, order, spatial arrangement
and collocation, of those hypothetical atomic factors. It has likewise
been commonly assumed that change in mass is solely due to change in the
number of those atoms, and change in volume (of the same mass) to the
relative density or closeness with which the atoms aggregate together;
though some have held—and it is certainly not inconceivable—that exactly
the same material entity, an atom let us say, may be capable of _real_
contraction and expansion, and so of _real_ change of volume: as distinct
from the _apparent_ contraction and expansion of bodies, a change which is
supposed to be due to change of density, _i.e._ to decrease or increase in
the dimensions of the pores or interstices between the smaller constituent
parts or molecules. However this may be, the attempts to reduce all change
in physical nature to mere _mechanical_ change _i.e._ to spatial motions
of the masses (_molar_ motions), the molecules (_molecular_ motions), and
the atoms or other ultimate components of matter (whether vibratory,
undulatory, rotatory or translational motions), have never been
satisfactory.

Qualitative change is wider than material change, for it includes changes
in spiritual beings, _i.e._ in beings which are outside the category of
quantity and have a mode of existence altogether different from the
extensional, spatial existence which characterizes matter. When, for
instance, the human mind acquires knowledge, it undergoes qualitative
change. But matter, too, has qualities, and is subject to qualitative
change. It is endowed with _active_ qualities, _i.e._ with powers, forces,
energies, whereby it can not merely perform mechanical work by producing
local changes in the distribution of its mass throughout space, but also
produce physical and chemical changes which seem at least to be different
in their nature from mere mechanical changes. It is likewise endowed with
_passive_ qualities which appear to the senses to be of various kinds,
differing from one another and from the mechanical or quantitative
characteristics of size, shape, motion, rest, etc. While these latter are
called “primary qualities” of bodies—because conceived to be more
fundamental and more closely inherent in the real and objective nature of
matter—or “common sensibles” (_sensibilia communia_), because perceptible
by more than one of our external senses—the former are called “secondary
qualities,” because conceived to be less characteristic of the real and
objective nature of matter, and more largely subjective products of our
own sentient cognitive activity—or “proper sensibles” (_sensibilia
propria_), because each of them is apprehended by only one of our external
senses: colour, sound, taste, odour, temperature, material state or
texture (_e.g._ roughness, liquidity, softness, etc.). Now about all these
perceived qualities and their changes the question has been raised: Are
they, as such, _i.e._ as perceived by us, really in the material things or
bodies which make up the physical universe, and really different in these
bodies from the quantitative factors and motions of the latter? Or, as
such, are they not rather partially or wholly subjective
phenomena—products, at least in part, of our own sense perception, states
of our own consciousness, having nothing really corresponding to them in
the external matter of the universe beyond the quantitative, mechanical
factors and motions whereby matter acts upon our faculties of sense
cognition and produces these states of consciousness in us? This is a
question of the first importance, the solution of which belongs to
Epistemology. Aristotle would not allow that the objective material
universe can be denuded, in the way just suggested, of qualities and
qualitative change; and scholastic philosophers have always held the same
general view. What we have to note here, however, in regard to the
question is simply this, that even if the world of matter were thus
simplified by transferring all qualitative change to the subjective domain
of consciousness, the reality of qualitative change and all the problems
arising from it would still persist. To transfer qualitative change from
object to subject, from matter to mind, is certainly something very
different from explaining it as reducible to quantitative or mechanical
change. The simplification thus effected would be more apparent than real:
it would be simplifying the world of matter by transferring its complexity
to the world of mind. This consideration is one which is sometimes lost
sight of by scientists who advance mechanical hypotheses as ultimate
explanations of the nature and activities of the physical universe.

If all material things and processes could be ultimately analysed into
configurations and local motions of space-occupying atoms, homogeneous in
nature and differing only in size and shape, then each of these ultimate
atomic factors would be itself exempt from intrinsic change as to its own
essence and individuality. In this hypothesis there would be really no
such thing as _substantial_ change. The collection of atoms would form an
immutable core of material reality, wholly simple and ever actual. Such an
hypothesis, however, is utterly inadequate as an explanation of the facts
of life and consciousness. And even as an account of the processes of the
inorganic universe it encounters insuperable difficulties. The common
belief of men has always been that even in this domain of reality there
are fundamentally different _kinds_ of matter, kinds which differ from one
another not merely in the shape and size and configuration and arrangement
of their ultimate _actual_ constituents, but even in the very substance or
nature of these constituents; and that there are some material changes
which affect the actual substance itself of the matter which undergoes
them. This belief scholastics, again following Aristotle, hold to be a
correct belief, and one which is well grounded in reason. And this belief
in turn involves the view that every type of actual material
entity—whether merely inorganic, or endowed with life, or even allied with
a higher, spiritual mode of being as in the case of man himself—is
_essentially composite_, essentially a synthesis of _potential_ and
_actual_ principles of being, and therefore capable of _substantial_
change. The actually existing material being scholastics describe as
_materia secunda_, the ὕλη ἐσχάτη of Aristotle; the purely potential
factor, which is actualized in this or that particular kind of matter,
they describe as _materia prima_, the ὕλη πρώτη of Aristotle; the
actualizing, specifying, formative principle, they designate as _forma
substantialis_ (εἶδος). And since the purely potential principle cannot
actually exist except as actualized by some formative principle, all
substantial change or transition from one substantial type to another is
necessarily both a _corruptio_ and a _generatio_. That is, it involves the
actual disappearance of one substantial form and the actual appearance of
another. Hence the scholastic aphorism regarding substantial change:
_Corruptio unius est generatio alterius_: the corruption or destruction of
one kind of material thing involves the generation of another kind.

The concepts of _materia prima_ and _forma substantialis_ are concepts not
of phenomenal entities directly accessible to the senses or the
imagination, but of principles which can be reached only mediately and by
intellect proper. They cannot be pictured in the imagination, which can
only attain to the sensible. We may help ourselves to grasp them
intellectually by the analogy of the shapeless block of marble and the
figure educed therefrom by the sculptor, but this is only an analogy: just
as the statue results from the union of an _accidental_ form with an
existing matter, so this matter itself, the substance _marble_, is
composed of a _substantial_ form and a primordial, _potential_ matter. But
there the analogy ceases.

Furthermore, when we consider that the proper and primary objects of the
human intellect itself are corporeal things or bodies, and that these
bodies actually exist in nature only as composite substances, subject to
essential or substantial change, we shall realize why it is that the
concept of _materia prima_ especially, being a mediate and negative
concept, is so difficult to grasp; for, as the scholastics describe it,
translating Aristotle’s formula, it is in itself _neque quid, neque
quantum, neque quale, neque aliquid eorum quibus ens determinatur_.( )
But it is through intellectual concepts alone, and not through imagination
images, that we may hope to analyse the nature and processes even of the
world of corporeal reality; and, as St. Thomas well observes, it was
because the ancient Greek atomists did not rise above the level of
thinking in imagination images that they failed to recognize the
existence, or explain the nature, of substantial change in the material
universe( ): an observation which applies with equal force to those
scientists and philosophers of our own time who would fain reduce all
physical processes to mere mechanical change.

Those, then, are the principal kinds of change, as analysed by Aristotle
and the scholastics. We may note, finally, that the distinction between
_immanent_ and _transitive_ activity is also applied to change—that is, to
change considered as a process, not to the result of the change, to change
_in fieri_, not _in facto esse_. Immanent movement or activity (_motio_,
_actio immanens_) is that of which the term, the educed actuality, remains
within the agent—which latter is therefore at once both _agens_ and
_patiens_. Vital action is of this kind. Transitive movement or activity,
on the other hand (_motio_, _actio transiens_), is that of which the term
is some actuality educed in a being other than the agent. The _patiens_ is
here really distinct from the _agens_; and it is in the former, not in the
latter, that the change takes place: _actio fit in passo_. All change in
the inorganic universe is of this sort ( ).





CHAPTER III. EXISTENCE AND ESSENCE.


 . EXISTENCE.—In the preceding chapters we examined reality in itself and
in its relation to change or becoming. We have now to examine it in
relation to its actual existence and to its intrinsic possibility ( ,
_a_).

_Existing_ or _being_ (in the participial sense: esse, _existere_, τὸ
εἶναι) is a simple, indefinable notion. A being is said to exist when it
is not merely possible but actual, when it is not merely potential in its
active and passive causes but has become actual through those causes
(_existere_: _ex-sisto_: _ex-stare_: to stand forth, distinct from its
causes); or, if it have no causes, when it simply is (_esse_),—in which
sense God, the Necessary, purely Actual Being, simply _is_. Thus,
existence implies the notion of actuality, and is conceived as that by
which any thing or essence _is, distinct from nothingness, in the actual
order_.( ) Or, again, it is _the actuality of any thing or essence_.
About any conceivable being we may ask two distinct questions: (_a_) What
is it? and (_b_) Does such a being actually exist? The answer to the
former gives us the _essence_, what is presented to the mind through the
concept; the answer to the latter informs us about the actual _existence_
of the being or essence in question.

To the mind of any individual man the real existence (as also the real
essence) of any being whatsoever, not excepting his own, can be known only
through its ideal presence in his mind, through the concept or percept
whereby it becomes for him a “known object,” an _objectum cognitum_. But
this actual presence of known being to the knowing mind must not be
confounded with the real existence of such being ( ). Real being does not
get its real existence in our minds or from our minds. Our cognition does
not produce, but only discovers, actually existing reality. The latter, by
acting on the mind, engenders therein the cognition of itself. Now all our
knowledge comes through the senses; and sense cognition is excited in us
by the direct action of material or phenomenal being on our sense
faculties. But through sense cognition the mind is able to attain to a
knowledge both of the possibility and of the actual existence of
suprasensible or spiritual realities. Hence we cannot describe existence
as the power which material realities have to excite in us a knowledge of
themselves. Their existence is prior to this activity: _prius est esse
quam agere_. Nor can we limit existence to material realities; for if
there are spiritual realities these too have existence, though this
existence can be discerned only by intellect, and not by sense.

 . ESSENCE.—In any existing thing we can distinguish _what the thing is_,
its _essence_, from its actual _existence_. If we abstract from the actual
existence of a thing, not considering whether it actually exists or not,
and fix our attention merely on _what the thing is_, we are thinking of
its _real essence_. If we positively exclude the notion of actual
existence from our concept of the essence, and think of the latter as not
actually existing, we are considering it formally as a _possible essence_.
There is no being, even the Necessary Being, whose essence we cannot think
of in the former way, _i.e._ _without including_ in our concept the notion
of actual existence; but we cannot without error _positively exclude_ the
notion of actual existence from our concept of the Necessary Being, or
think of the latter as a _merely possible_ essence.

Taken in its widest sense, the essence of a thing (οὐσία, _essentia_, τὸ
τί ἐστι, _quod quid est_, _quidditas_) means _that by which a thing is
what it is_: _id quo res est id quod est_: that which gives us the answer
to the question, What is this thing? _Quid est haec res?_ τί ἐστι τόδε
τι.( ) Now of course any individual thing is what it is just precisely by
all the reality that is in it; but we have no direct or intuitive
intellectual insight into this reality; we understand it only by degrees;
we explore it from various points of view, abstracting and generalizing
partial aspects of it as we compare it with other things and seek to
classify and define it: _ratio humana essentias rerum quasi venatur_, as
the scholastics say: the human mind hunts, as it were, after the essences
or natures of things. Understanding the individual datum of sense
experience (what Aristotle called τόδε τι, or οὐσία πρώτη, and the
scholastics _hoc aliquid_, or _substantia prima_), _e.g._ this individual,
Socrates, first under the vaguest concept of being, then gradually under
the more and more determinate concepts of substance, corporeal, living,
sentient, rational, it finally forms the complex concept of his _species
infima_, expressed by his lowest class-name, “man,” and explicitly set
forth in the definition of his specific nature as a “rational animal”. Nor
does our reason fail to realize that by reaching this concept of the
_specific_ essence or nature of the individual, Socrates, it has not yet
grasped all the reality whereby the individual is what he is. It has
reached what he has in common with all other individuals of his class,
what is essential to him _as a man_; it has distinguished this from the
unanalysed something which makes him _this particular individual_ of his
class, and which makes his specific essence this _individual essence_
(_essentia_ “_atoma_,” or “_individua_”); and it has also distinguished
his essence from those accidental and ever varying attributes which are
not essential to him as a man, and from those which are not essential to
him as Socrates. It is only the unfathomed individual essence, as existing
_hic et nunc_, that is _concrete_. All the mind’s generic and specific
representations of it—_e.g._ of Socrates as a corporeal substance, a
living being, a sentient being, a rational animal—are _abstract_, and all
more or less inadequate, none of them exhausting its knowable reality. But
it is only in so far as the mind is able to represent concrete individual
things by such abstract concepts, that it can attain to _intellectual_
knowledge of their nature or reality. Hence it is that by the term
“essence,” simply and _sine addito_, we always mean the essence as grasped
by abstract generic or specific concepts (ἔιδος, _species_), and as thus
capable of definition (λόγος, _ratio rei_). “The essence,” says St.
Thomas, “is that by which the thing is constituted in its proper genus or
species, and which we signify by the definition which states what the
thing is”.( ) Thus understood, the essence is abstract, and gives the
specific or generic type to which the individual thing belongs; but we may
also mean by essence, the concrete essence, the individual person or thing
(_persona_, _suppositum_, _res individua_). The relations between the
objects of those two concepts of essence will be examined later.

Since the specific essence is conceived as the most fundamental reality in
the thing, and as the seat and source of all the properties and activities
of the thing, it is sometimes defined or described, in accordance with
this notion of it, as the primary constitutive of the thing and the source
of all the properties of the thing. Conceived as the foundation of all the
properties of the thing it is sometimes called _substance_ (οὐσία,
_substantia_). Regarded as the source of the thing’s activities, and the
principle of its growth or development, it is called the _nature_ of the
thing (φύσις, _natura_, from φύω, _nascor_).( )

Since what makes a thing that which it is, by the same fact differentiates
this thing from every other thing, the essence is rightly conceived as
that which gives the thing its characteristic being, thereby marking it
off from all other being. In reality, of course, each individual being is
distinct by all that it is from every other. But since we get our
intellectual knowledge of things by abstracting, comparing, generalizing,
and classifying partial aspects of them, we apprehend part of the
imperfectly grasped abstract essence of each individual as common to other
classes (generic), and part as peculiar to that class itself
(differential); and thus we differentiate classes of things by what is
only part of their essence, by what we call the _differentia_ of each
class, _distinguishing mentally_ between it and the generic element: which
two are really _one_, really identical, in every individual of the species
thus defined and classified.

But in the Aristotelian and scholastic view of the constitution of any
_corporeal_ thing, there is a danger of taking what is really only part of
the essence of such a thing for the whole essence. According to this view
all corporeal substance is essentially composite, constituted by two
really distinct, substantial principles, primal matter (πρώτη ὕλη,
_materia prima_) and substantial form (ἔιδος, μορφή) united substantially,
as potential and actual principles, to form one composite nature or
essence. Now the kind, or species, or specific type, to which a body
belongs—_e.g._, a horse, an oak, gold, water, etc.—depends upon the
substantial form which actualizes the matter or potential principle. In so
far as the corporeal essence is known to us at all it is known through the
form, which is the principle of all the characteristic properties and
activities of that particular kind of body. Hence it is quite natural that
the εἲδος, μόρφη, or _forma substantialis_ of a body should often be
referred to as the specific essence of the body, though of course the
essence of the body really includes the material as well as the formal
factor.

We may look at the essence of any being from two points of view. If we
consider it as it is conceived actually to exist in the being, we call it
the _physical essence_. If we consider it after the manner in which it is
apprehended and defined by our intellects through generic and
differentiating concepts, we call it the _metaphysical essence_. Thus, the
essence of man conceived by the two defining concepts, “rational animal,”
is the metaphysical essence; the essence of man as known to be composed of
the two really distinct substantial principles, soul and body, is the
physical essence. Understood in this way both are one and the same essence
considered from different points of view—as existing in the actual order,
and as conceived by the mind.( )

The physical essence of any being, understood as the constitutive
principle or principles from which all properties spring, is either
_simple_ or _composite_ according as it is understood to consist of one
such constitutive principle, or to result from the substantial union of
two constitutive principles, a material and a formal. Thus, the essence of
God, the essence of a purely spiritual being, the essence of the human
soul, are physically simple; the essence of man, the essences of all
corporeal beings, are physically composite.

According to our mode of conceiving, defining and classifying essences by
means of the abstract generic and differential grades of being which we
apprehend in them, all essences, even physically simple essences, are
conceived as logically and metaphysically composite. Moreover we speak and
think of their generic and differential factors as “material” and “formal”
respectively, after the analogy of the composition of corporeal or
physically composite essences from the union of two really distinct
principles, matter and form; the analogy consisting in this, that as
matter is the indeterminate principle which is determined and actuated by
form, so the _generic_ concept is the indeterminate concept which is made
definite and specific by that of the _differentia_.( ) But when we think
of the _genus_ of any corporeal essence as “material,” and the
_differentia_ as “formal,” we must not consider these “metaphysical parts”
as really distinct; whereas the “physical parts” of a corporeal substance
(such as man) are really distinct. The genus (animal), although a
metaphysical part, expresses the _whole essence_ (man) in an indeterminate
way; whereas the “matter” which is a physical part, does not express the
whole essence of man, nor does the soul which is also a physical part, but
only both together. Not a little error has resulted from the confusion of
thought whereby _genus_ and _differentia_ have been regarded as material
and formal constitutives in the literal sense of those expressions.

 . CHARACTERISTICS OF ABSTRACT ESSENCES.—When we consider the essences of
things not as actually existing, but as intrinsically possible—the
abstract, metaphysical essences, therefore—we find that when as objects of
our thought they are analysed into their simplest constituents and
compared or related with themselves and with one another they present
themselves to our minds in these relations as endowed with certain more or
less remarkable characteristics.

(_a_) In the first place, being abstract, they present themselves to the
mind as being what they are independently of actual existence at any
particular time or place. Their intelligibility is something apart from
any relation to any actual time or place. Being intrinsically possible,
they might exist at any time or place; but as possible, they are out of
time and out of place—_detemporalized_ and _delocalized_, if we may be
permitted to use such expressions.( )

(_b_) Furthermore, since the intellect forms its notions of them, through
the aid of the senses and the imagination, from actual realizations of
themselves or their constituent factors, and since it understands them to
be intrinsically possible, or free from intrinsic incompatibility of their
constituent factors, it conceives them to be capable of indefinitely
repeated actualizations throughout time and space—unless it sees some
special reason to the contrary, as it does in the case of the Necessary
Being, and (according to some philosophers) in the case of purely
immaterial beings or pure spirits. That is to say it _universalizes_ them,
and sees them to be capable of existing at any and every conceivable time
and place. This relation of theirs to space is not likely to be confounded
with the _immensity_ or _ubiquity_ of God. But their corresponding
relation to time is sometimes described as _eternity_; and if it is so
described it must be carefully distinguished from the _positive_ eternity
of God, the Immutable Being. To distinguish it from the latter it is
usually described as _negative_ eternity,—this indifference of the
possible essence to actual existence at any particular point of time.


    But apart from this relation which we conceive it as having to
    existence in the order of actual reality, can we, or do we, or
    must we conceive it as in itself an intrinsic possibility _from
    all eternity_, in the sense that it _never began_ to be
    intrinsically possible, and will never cease to be so? Must we
    attribute to it a _positive_ eternity, not of course of actuality
    or existence, but of _ideal_ being, as an object of thought to an
    Eternally Existing Mind? What is this supposed eternal possibility
    of the possible essence? Is it nothing actual: the possible as
    such is nothing actual. But is it anything real? Has it only ideal
    being—_esse ideale_ or _intentionale_? And has it this only in and
    from the human mind, or independently of the human mind? And also
    independently of the _actual_ essences from which the human mind
    gets the data for its thought,—so that we must ascribe to it an
    _eternal_ ideal being? To these questions we shall return
    presently.


(_c_) Thirdly, essences considered apart from their actual existence, and
compared with their own constitutive factors or with one another, reveal
to the mind relations which the mind sees to be _necessary_, and which it
formulates for itself in _necessary_ judgments,—judgments _in materia
necessaria_. By virtue of the principle of identity an abstract essence is
_necessarily_ what it is, what the mind conceives it to be, what the mind
conceives as its definition. Man, as an object of thought, is
_necessarily_ a rational animal, whether he actually exists or not. And if
he is thought of as existing, he cannot at the same time be thought of as
non-existing,—by the principle of contradiction. An existing man is
necessarily an existing man,—by the principle of identity. These logical
principles are rooted in the nature of reality, whether actual or
possible, considered as an _object of thought_. There is thus a necessary
relation between any complex object of thought and each of the constituent
factors into which the mind can analyse it. And, similarly, there is a
necessary negative relation—a relation of exclusion—between any object of
thought and anything which the mind sees to be incompatible with that
object as a whole, or with any of its constituent factors.

Again, the mind sees necessary relations between abstract essences
compared with one another. Five and seven are _necessarily_ twelve.
Whatever begins to exist actually _must_ have a cause. Contingent being,
if such exists, is _necessarily_ dependent for its existence on some other
actually existing being. If potential being is actualized it _must_ be
actualized by actual being. The three interior angles of a triangle are
_necessarily_ equal to two right angles. And so on.

But is the abstract essence itself—apart from all mental analysis of it,
apart from all comparison of it with its constituent factors or with other
essences—in any sense _necessary_? There is no question of its actual
existence, but only of itself as an object of thought. Now our thought
does not seem to demand _necessarily_, or have a _necessary_ connexion
with, any particular object of which we do _de facto_ think. What we do
think of is determined by our experience of _actual_ things. And the
things which we conceive to be possible, by the exercise of our reason
upon the data of our senses, memory and imagination, are determined as to
their nature and number by our experience of actual things, even although
they themselves can and do pass beyond the domain of actually experienced
things. The only necessary object of thought is reality in general: for
the exercise of the function of thought necessarily demands an object, and
this object must be reality of some sort. Thought, as we saw, begins with
actual reality. Working upon this, thought apprehends in it the
foundations of those necessary relations and judgments already referred
to. Considering, moreover, the actual data of experience, our thought can
infer from these the actual existence of one Being Who must exist by a
necessity of His Essence.


    But, furthermore, must all the possible essences which the mind
    does or can actually think of, be conceived as _necessarily
    possible_ in the same sense in which it is suggested that they
    must be conceived as eternally possible? To this question, too, we
    shall return presently.


(_d_) Finally, possible essences appear to the mind as _immutable_, and
consequently _indivisible_. This means simply that the relations which we
establish between them and their constitutive factors are not only
necessary but immutable: that if any constitutive factor of an essence is
conceived as removed from it, or any new factor as added, we have no
longer the original essence but some other essence. If “animal” is a being
essentially embodying the two objective concepts of “organism” and
“sentient,” then on removing either we have no longer the essence
“animal”. So, too, by adding to these some other element compatible with
them, _e.g._ “rational,” we have no longer the essence “animal,” but the
essence “man”. Hence possible essences have been likened to numbers,
inasmuch as if we add anything to, or subtract anything from, any given
number, we have now no longer the original number but another.( ) This,
too, is only an expression of the laws of identity and contradiction.


    We might ask, however, whether, apart from analysis and comparison
    of an abstract object of thought with its constitutive notes or
    factors, such a possible essence is in itself _immutably_
    possible. This is similar to the question whether we can or must
    conceive such a possible essence as eternally and necessarily
    possible.


 . GROUNDS OF THOSE CHARACTERISTICS.—In considering the grounds or
reasons of the various characteristics just enumerated it may be well to
reflect that when we speak of the _intrinsic possibility_ of a possible
essence we conceive the latter as something complex, which we mentally
resolve into its constitutive notes or factors or principles, to see if
these are compatible. If they are we pronounce the essence intrinsically
possible, if not we pronounce it intrinsically impossible. For our minds,
absence of internal incompatibility in the content of our concept of any
object is the test of its intrinsic possibility. Whatever fulfils this
test we consider capable of existing. But what about the possibility of
the notes, or factors, or principles themselves, whereby we define those
essences, and by the union of which we conceive those essences to be
constituted? How do we know that those abstract principles or factors—no
one of which can actually exist alone, since all are abstract—can in
certain combinations form _possible_ objects of thought? We can know this
only because we have either experienced such objects as actual, or because
we infer their possibility from objects actually experienced. And
similarly our knowledge of what is impossible is based upon our experience
of the actual. Since, moreover, our experience of the actual is finite and
fallible, we may err in our judgments as to what essences are, and what
are not, intrinsically possible.( )

If now we ask ourselves what intelligible reason can we assign for the
characteristics just indicated as belonging to possible essences, we must
fix our attention first of all on the fundamental fact that the human
intellect always apprehends its object _in an abstract condition_. It
contemplates the essence apart from the existence in which the essence is
subject to circumstances of time and place and change; it grasps the
essence in a static condition as simply identical with itself and distinct
from all else; it sees the essence as indifferent to existence at any
place or time; reflecting then on the actualization of this essence in the
existing order of things, it apprehends the essence as capable of
indefinite actualizations (except in cases where it sees some reason to
the contrary), _i.e._ it _universalizes_ the essence; comparing it with
its constituent notes or elements, and with those of other essences, it
sees and affirms certain relations (of identity or diversity,
compatibility or incompatibility, between those notes or elements) as
holding good _necessarily_ and _immutably_, and independently of the
actual embodiment of those notes or elements in any object existing at any
particular place or time. All these features of the relations between the
constituents of abstract, possible essences, seem so far to be adequately
accounted for by the fact that the intellect apprehends those essences _in
the abstract_: the data in which it apprehends them being given to it
through sense experience. What may be inferred from the fact that the
human intellect has this power of abstract thought, is another
question( ). But granting that it does apprehend essences in this manner,
we seem to have in this fact a sufficient explanation of the features just
referred to.

We have, however, already suggested other questions about the reality of
those possible essences. Is their possibility, so far as known to us,
explained by our experience of actual things? Or must we think them as
eternally, necessarily and immutably possible? From the manner in which we
must apprehend them, can we infer anything about the reality of an
Eternal, Immutable, Necessary Intelligence, in whose Thought and Essence
alone those essences, as apprehended by our minds, can find their ultimate
ground and explanation? These are the questions we must now endeavour to
examine.

 . POSSIBLE ESSENCES AS SUCH ARE SOMETHING DISTINCT FROM MERE LOGICAL
BEING, AND FROM NOTHINGNESS.—There have been philosophers who have held
that the actual alone is real, and only while it is actual; that a purely
(intrinsically) possible essence as such is nothing real; that the actual
alone is possible; that the purely possible as such is impossible. This
view is based on the erroneous assumption that whatever is or becomes
actual is so, or becomes so, by some sort of unintelligible fatalistic
necessity. Apart from the fact that it is incompatible with certain truths
of theism, such as the Divine Omnipotence and Freedom in creating, it also
involves the denial of all real becoming or change, and the assertion that
all actuality is eternal; for if anything becomes actual, it was
previously either possible or impossible; if impossible, it could never
become actual; if possible, then as possible it was something different
from the impossible, or from absolute nothingness. Moreover, the
intrinsically possible is capable of becoming actual, and may be
actualized if there exists some actual being with power to actualize it;
but absolute nothingness—or, in other words, the intrinsically
impossible—cannot be actualized, even by Omnipotence; therefore the
possible essence as such is something positive or real, as distinct from
nothingness. Finally, intrinsically possible essences can be clearly
distinguished from one another by the mind; but their negation which is
pure non-entity or nothingness cannot be so distinguished. It is therefore
clear that possible essences are in some true sense something positive or
real. From which it follows that nothingness, in the strict sense, is not
the mere absence or negation of actuality, but also the absence or
negation of that positive or real something which is intrinsic
possibility; in other words that nothingness in the strict sense means
intrinsic impossibility.

Even those who hold the opinion just rejected—that the purely possible
essence as such has no reality in any conceivable sense—would presumably
admit that it is an object of human thought at all events; they would
accord to it the being it has from the human mind which thinks it. It
would therefore be an _ens rationis_ according to this view, having only
the ideal being which consists in its being constituted and contemplated
by the human mind. That it has the ideal being, the _esse ideale_ or _esse
intentionale_, which consists in its being contemplated by the human mind
as an object of thought, no one will deny. But a little reflection will
show, firstly, that this ideal being is something more than the ideal
being of an _ens rationis_, of a mere logical entity; and, secondly, that
a possible essence must have some other ideal being than that which it has
in the individual human mind.

The possible essence is not a mere logical entity; for the latter cannot
be conceived as capable of existing apart from the human mind, in the
world of actual existences ( ), whereas the former can be, and is in fact,
conceived as capable of such existence. Its ideal being in the human mind
is, therefore, something other than that of a mere logical entity.

The ideal being which it has in the human mind as an object of thought is
undoubtedly derived from the mind’s knowledge of actual things. We think
of the essences of actually experienced realities apart from their actual
existence. Thus abstracted, we analyse them, compare them, reason from
them. By these processes we can not merely attain to a knowledge of the
actual existence of other realities above and beyond and outside of our
own direct and immediate intuitional experience, but we can also form
concepts of multitudes of realities or essences as intrinsically possible,
thus giving these latter an ideal existence in our own minds. Here, then,
the question arises: Is this the only ideal being that can be ascribed to
such essences? In other words, are essences intrinsically possible because
_we think_ them as intrinsically possible? Or is it not rather the case
that we think them to be intrinsically possible because they are
intrinsically possible? Does our thought constitute, or does it not rather
merely discover, their intrinsic possibility? Does the latter result from,
or is it not rather presupposed by, our thought-activity? The second
alternative suggested in each of these questions is the true one. As our
thought is not the source of their actuality, neither is it the source of
their intrinsic possibility. Solipsism is the _reductio ad absurdum_ of
the philosophy which would reduce all _actuality_ experienced by the
individual mind to phases, or phenomena, or self-manifestations, of the
individual mind itself as the one and only actuality. And no less absurd
is the philosophy which would accord to all _intrinsically possible_
realities no being other than the ideal being which they have as the
thought-objects of the individual human mind. The study of the _actual_
world of direct experience leads the impartial and sincere inquirer to the
conclusion that it is in some true sense a manifestation of mind or
intelligence: not, however, of his own mind, which is itself only a very
tiny item in the totality of the actual world, but of one Supreme
Intelligence. And in this same Intelligence the world of possible essences
too will be found to have its original and fundamental ideal being.

 . POSSIBLE ESSENCES HAVE, BESIDES IDEAL BEING, NO OTHER SORT OF BEING OR
REALITY PROPER AND INTRINSIC TO THEMSELVES.—Before inquiring further into
the manner in which we attain to a knowledge of this Intelligence, and of
the ideal being of possible essences in this Intelligence, we may ask
whether, above and beyond such ideal being, possible essences have not
perhaps from all eternity some being or reality proper and intrinsic to
themselves; not indeed the actual being which they possess when actualized
in time, but yet some kind of _intrinsic_ reality as distinct from the
_extrinsic_ ideal being, or _esse intentionale_, which consists merely in
this that they are objects of thought present as such to a Supreme
Intelligence or Mind.

Some few medieval scholastics( ) contended that possible essences have
from all eternity not indeed the existence they may receive by creation or
production in time, but an intrinsic essential being which, by creation or
production, may be transferred to the order of actual existences, and
which, when actual existence ceases (if they ever receive it), still
continues immutable and incorruptible: what these writers called the _esse
essentiae_, as distinct from the _esse existentiae_, conceiving it to be
intermediate between the latter on the one hand and mere ideal or logical
being on the other, and hence calling it _esse diminutum_ or _secundum
quid_. Examining the question from the standpoint of theism, these authors
seem to have thought that since God understands these essences as possible
from all eternity, and since this knowledge must have as its term or
object something real and positive, these essences must have some real and
proper intrinsic being from all eternity: otherwise they would be simply
nothingness, and nothingness cannot be the term of the Divine
Intelligence. But the obvious reply is that though possible essences as
such are _nothing actual_ they must be distinguished as realities, capable
of actually existing, from _absolute nothingness_; and that as thus
distinguished from absolute nothingness they are really and positively
intelligible to the Divine Mind, as indeed they are even to the human
mind. To be intelligible they need not have actual being. They must, no
doubt, be capable of having actual being, in order to be understood as
realities: it is precisely in this understood capability that their
reality consists, for the real includes not only what actually exists but
whatever is capable of actual existence. Whatever is opposed to absolute
nothingness is real; and this manifestly includes not only the actual but
whatever is intrinsically possible.

Realities or essences which have not actual being have only ideal being;
and ideal being means simply presence in some mind as an object of
thought. Scholastic philosophers generally( ) hold that possible essences
as such have no other being than this; that before and until such essences
actually exist they have of themselves and in themselves no being except
the ideal being which they have as objects of the Divine Intelligence and
the virtual being they have in the Divine Omnipotence which may at any
time give them actual existence. One convincing reason for this view is
the consideration that if possible essences as such had from all eternity
any proper and intrinsic being in themselves, God could neither create nor
annihilate. For in that hypothesis essences, on becoming actual, would not
be produced _ex nihilo_, inasmuch as before becoming actual they would in
themselves and from all eternity have had their own proper real being; and
after ceasing to be actual they would still retain this. But creation is
the production of _the whole reality_ of actual being from nothingness;
and is therefore impossible if the actual being is merely produced from an
essence already real, _i.e._ having an eternal positive reality of its
own. The same is true of annihilation. The theory of eternally existing
uncreated _matter_ is no less incompatible with the doctrine of creation
than this theory of eternally real and uncreated forms or essences.

Again, what could this supposed positive and proper reality of the
possible essence be? If it is anything distinct from the mere ideal being
of such an essence, as it is assumed to be, it must after all be _actual_
being of some sort, which would apparently have to be actualized again in
order to have actual existence! Finally, this supposed eternal reality,
proper to possible essences, cannot be anything uncreated. For whatever is
uncreated is God; and since it is these supposed proper realities of
possible essences that are made actual, and constitute the existing
created universe, the latter would be in this view an actualization of the
Divine Essence itself,—which is pantheism pure and simple. And neither can
this supposed eternal reality, proper to possible essences, be anything
created. For such creation would be eternal and necessary; whereas God’s
creative activity is admitted by all scholastics to be essentially free;
and although they are not agreed as to whether “creation from all
eternity” (“_creatio ab aeterno_”) is possible, they are agreed that it is
not a fact.

Possible essences as such are therefore nothing actual. Furthermore, as
such they have in themselves no positive being. But they are not therefore
unreal. They are positively intelligible as capable of actual existence,
and therefore as distinct from logical entities or _entia rationis_ which
are not capable of such existence. They are present as objects of thought
to mind; and to some mind other than the individual human mind. About this
ideal being which they have in this Mind we have now in the next place to
inquire.

 . INFERENCES FROM OUR KNOWLEDGE OF POSSIBLE ESSENCES.—We have stated
that an impartial study of the _actual_ world will lead to the conclusion
that it is dependent on a Supreme Intelligence; and we have suggested that
in this Supreme Intelligence also possible essences as such have their
primary ideal being ( ,  ). When the existence of God has been
established—as it may be established by various lines of argument—from
_actual_ things, we can clearly see, as will be pointed out presently,
that in the Divine Essence all possible essences have the ultimate source
of their possibility. But many scholastic philosophers contend that the
nature and properties of possible essences, as apprehended by the human
mind, furnish a distinct and conclusive argument for the existence of a
Supreme Uncreated Intelligence.( ) Others deny the validity of such a
line of reasoning, contending that it is based on misapprehension and
misinterpretation of those characteristics.


    All admit that it is not human thought that makes essences
    possible: they are intelligible to the human mind because they are
    possible, not _vice versa_.( ) For the human mind the immediate
    source and ground of their intrinsic possibility and
    characteristics is the fact that they are given to it in _actual_
    experience while it has the power of considering them _apart from
    their actual existence_.

    But ( ) are they not independent of experienced actuality, no less
    than of the human mind, so that we are forced to infer from them
    the reality of a Supreme Eternal Mind in which they have eternal
    ideal being?

    ( ) Is not any possible essence (_e.g._ “water,” or “a triangle”)
    so necessarily what it is that even if it never did and never will
    exist, nay even were there no human or other finite mind to
    conceive it, it would still be what it is (_e.g._ “a chemical
    compound of oxygen and hydrogen,” or “a plane rectilinear
    three-sided figure”)—so that there must be some Necessarily
    Existing Intelligence in and from which it has this necessary
    truth as a possible essence?( ) These essences, as known to us,
    are so far from being grounded in, or explained by, the things of
    our actual experience, that we rather regard the latter as
    grounded in the former. Do we not consider possible essences as
    the prototypes and exemplars to which actual things must conform
    in order to be actual, in order to exist at all?( )

    ( ) Finally, the relations which we apprehend as obtaining between
    them, we see to be necessary and immutable relations. They embody
    necessary truths which are for our minds the standards of all
    truth. Such necessary truths cannot be grounded either in the
    contingent human mind, or in the contingent and mutable actuality
    of the things of our immediate experience. Therefore we can and
    must infer from them the reality of a Necessary, Immutable Being,
    of whose essence they must be imitations.

    If, then, this ideal order of intrinsically possible essences is
    logically and ontologically prior to the contingent actualizations
    of any of them (even though it be posterior to them _in the order
    of our knowledge_, which is based on _actual experience_), there
    must be likewise ontologically prior to all contingent actualities
    (including our own minds) some _Necessary Intelligence_ in which
    this order of possible essences has its ideal being.

     . CRITICAL ANALYSIS OF THOSE INFERENCES.—The validity of the
    general line of argument indicated in the preceding paragraphs has
    been seriously questioned. Among other criticisms the following
    points have been urged( ):—

    ( ) _Actual_ things furnish the basis of irrefragable proofs of
    the existence of God—the Supreme, Necessary, Eternal, Omniscient,
    and Omnipotent Being. But we are here inquiring whether a mind
    which has not yet so analysed actual being as to see how it
    involves this conclusion, or a mind which abstracts altogether
    from the evidence furnished by actual things for this conclusion,
    can prove the existence of such a being from the separate
    consideration of possible essences, their attributes and
    relations. Now it is not evident that to such a mind possible
    essences reveal themselves as having _eternal_ ideal being. Such a
    mind is, no doubt, conscious that it is not itself the cause of
    their possibility. But it sees that actual things _plus_ the
    abstract character of its own thought account sufficiently for all
    their features as it knows them. To the question: Is not their
    ideal being _eternal_? it can only answer: That will depend on
    whether the world of actual things can be shown to involve the
    existence of an Eternal Intelligence. Until this is proved we
    cannot say whether possible essences have any ideal being other
    than that which they have in human minds.

    ( ) The actual things from which we get our concepts of possible
    essences do not exist _necessarily_. But, granted their existence,
    we know from them that certain essences are _de facto_ possible.
    They are not _necessarily_ given to us as possible, any more than
    actual things are necessarily given to us as actual. Of course,
    when they are thought of at all, they are, as objects of thought,
    necessarily and immutably identical with themselves, and related
    to one another as mutually compatible or incompatible, etc. But
    this necessity of relations, hypothetical as it is and contingent
    on the mental processes of analysis and comparison, involved as it
    is in the very nature of being and thought, and expressed as it is
    in the principles of identity and contradiction, is just as true
    of actual contingent essences as of possible essences;( ) and it
    is something very different from the sort of necessity claimed for
    possible essences by the contention that they must be conceived as
    having ideal being _necessarily_. The ideal being they have in the
    human mind is certainly not necessary: the human mind might never
    have conceived these possible essences.

    But must the human mind conceive a possible essence as having
    _some_ ideal being _necessarily_? No; unless that mind has already
    convinced itself, from a study of _actual_ things, that an
    Eternal, Necessary, Omniscient Intelligence exists: to which, of
    course, such essences would be eternally and necessarily present
    as objects of thought. If the human mind had already reached this
    conviction it could then see that “even if there were no human
    intellect, things would still be true in relation to the Divine
    Intellect. But if both intellects were, _per impossibile_,
    conceived as non-existent truth would persist no longer.”( )
    Suppose, therefore, that it has not yet reached this conviction,
    or abstracts altogether from the existence of God as known from
    _actual_ things; and then, further, imagines the actual things of
    its experience and all human intellects and finite intellects of
    whatsoever kind as non-existent: must it still conceive possible
    things as possible? No; possibility and impossibility, truth and
    falsity will now have ceased to have any meaning. After such
    attempted abstraction the mind would have before it only what
    Balmes describes as “the abyss of nothing”. And Balmes is right in
    saying that the mind is unable “to abstract all existence”. But
    the reason of the inability is not, as Balmes contends, because
    when it has removed actual things and finite minds there still
    remains in spite of it a system or order of possible essences
    which forces it to infer and posit the existence of an Eternal,
    Necessary Mind as the source and ground of that order. The reason
    rather is because the mind sees that the known _actual_ things,
    from which it got all its notions of possible essences,
    necessarily imply, as the only intelligible ground of their
    actuality, the existence of a Necessary Being, in whose
    Intelligence they must have been contained ideally, and in whose
    Omnipotence they must have been contained virtually, from all
    eternity. From contingent _actuality_, as known to it, the mind
    can argue to the eternal actuality of Necessary Being, and to the
    impossibility either of a state of absolute nothingness, or of an
    order of purely possible things apart from all actuality.

    ( ) Of course, whether the mind has thus thought out the ultimate
    implications of the actuality of experienced things or not, once
    it has thought and experienced those things it cannot by any
    effort banish the memory of them from its presence: they are there
    still as objects of its thought even when it abstracts from their
    actual existence. But if, while it has not yet seen that their
    actuality implies the existence of a Necessary, Omniscient and
    Omnipotent Being, it abstracts not only from their actual
    existence but from the existence of all finite minds (itself
    included), then in that state, so far as its knowledge goes, there
    would be neither actual nor ideal nor possible being. Nor can the
    fact that an ideal order of possible things still persists in its
    own thought mislead it into concluding that such an ideal order
    really persists in the hypothesis it has made. For it knows that
    this ideal order still persists for itself simply because it
    cannot “think itself away”. It sees all the time that if it could
    effectively think itself away, this ideal order would have to
    disappear with it, leaving nothing—so far as it knows—either
    actual or possible. Mercier has some apposite remarks on this very
    point. “From the fact,” he writes, “that those abstract essences,
    grasped by our abstractive thought from the dawn of our reason,
    have grown so familiar to us, we easily come to look upon them as
    pre-existing archetypes or models of our thoughts and of things;
    they form a fund of predicates by which we are in the habit of
    interpreting the data of our experience. So, too, the
    hypothetically necessary relations established by abstract thought
    between them we come to regard as a sort of eternal system of
    principles, endowed with a sort of legislative power, to which
    created things and intelligences must conform. But they have
    really no such pre-existence. The eternal pre-existence of those
    essence-types, which Plato called the ‘intelligible world,’ the
    τόπος νοητός, and the supposed eternal legislative power of their
    relations, are a sort of mental optical illusion. Those abstract
    essences, and the principles based upon them, are the products of
    our mental activity working on the data of our actual experience.
    When we enter on the domain of _speculative reflection_ ... they
    are there before us; ... but we must not forget that reflection is
    _consequent_ on the spontaneous thought-activity which—by working
    abstractively on the actual data of sensible, contingent,
    changeable, temporal realities—set them up there.... We know from
    psychology how those ideal, abstract essence-types are formed....
    But because we have no actual memory of their formation, which is
    so rapid as practically to escape consciousness in spontaneous
    thought, we are naturally prone to imagine that they are not the
    product of our own mental action on the data of actual experience,
    but that they exist in us, or rather above us, and independently
    of us. We can therefore understand the psychological illusion
    under which Plato wrote such passages as the following: ‘But if
    anyone should tell me why anything is beautiful, either because it
    has a blooming, florid colour, or figure, or anything else of the
    kind, I dismiss all other reasons, for I am confounded by them
    all; but I simply, wholly, and perhaps naïvely, confine myself to
    this, that nothing else causes it to be beautiful, except either
    the presence or communication of that abstract beauty, by whatever
    means and in whatever way communicated; for I cannot yet affirm
    with certainty, but only that by means of beauty all beautiful
    things become beautiful (τῷ καλῷ τὰ καλὰ γίγνεται καλά). For this
    appears to me the safest answer to give both to myself and others,
    and adhering to this I think that I shall never fall [into
    error].... And that by magnitude great things become great, and
    greater things greater; and by littleness less things become
    less.’( ) St. Augustine’s doctrine on the invariable laws of
    numbers, on the immutable principles of wisdom, and on truth
    generally, draws its inspiration from this Platonic
    idealism.”( )

    But this Platonic doctrine, attributing to the abstract essences
    conceived by our thought a reality independent both of our thought
    and of the actual sense data from which directly or indirectly we
    derive our concepts of them, is rejected as unsound by scholastics
    generally. When we have proved from actual things that God exists,
    and is the Intelligent and Free Creator of the actual world of our
    direct experience, we can of course consider the Divine Intellect
    as contemplating from all eternity the Divine Essence, and as
    seeing therein the eternal archetypes or ideas of all actual and
    possible essences. We may thus regard the Divine Mind as the
    eternal τόπος νοητός, or _mundus intelligibilis_. This, of course,
    is not Plato’s thought; it is what St. Augustine substituted for
    Platonism, and very properly. But we must not infer, from this
    truth, that when we contemplate possible essences, with all the
    characteristics we may detect in them, we are contemplating this
    _mundus intelligibilis_ which is the Divine Mind. This was the
    error of the ontologists. They inferred that since possible
    essences, as known by the human mind, have ideal being
    independently of the latter and of all actual contingent reality,
    the human mind in contemplating them has really an intuition of
    them as they are seen by the Divine Intellect Itself in the Divine
    Essence; so that, in the words of Gioberti, the _Primum
    Ontologicum_, the Divine Being Himself, is also the _primum
    logicum_, or first reality apprehended by human thought.( )

    Now those authors who hold that the ideal order of possible
    essences contemplated by the human mind is seen by the latter, as
    so contemplated, to have some being, some ideal being, really
    independent of the human mind itself, and of the actual contingent
    things from which they admit that the human mind derives its
    knowledge of such essences,—these authors _do not hold_, but
    _deny_, that this independent ideal being, which they claim for
    these essences, is _anything Divine_, that it is the Divine
    Essence as seen by the Divine Intellect to be imitable _ad
    extra_.( ) Hence they cannot fairly be charged with the error of
    ontologism.

    Renouncing Plato’s exaggerated realism, and holding that our
    knowledge of the ideal order of possible essences is derived by
    our mind from its consideration of _actual_ things, they yet hold
    that this ideal order is seen to have some sort of being or
    reality independent both of the mind and of actual things.( )
    This is not easy to understand. When we ask, Is this supposed
    independent being (or reality, or possibility) of possible
    essences the ideal being they have in the Divine mind?—we are told
    that it is not;( ) but that it is something from which we can
    _infer, by reasoning_, this eternal, necessary, and immutable
    ideal being of these same essences in the Divine Mind.

    The considerations urged in the foregoing paragraphs will,
    however, have shown that the validity of this line of reasoning
    from possible essences to the reality of an Eternal, Divine,
    Immutable Intelligence is by no means evident or free from
    difficulties. Of course, when the existence of God has been proved
    from actual things, the conception of the Divine Intelligence and
    Essence as the ultimate source of all possible reality, no less
    than of all actual reality, will be found to shed a great deal of
    new light upon the intrinsic possibility of possible essences.
    Since, however, our knowledge of the Divine is merely analogical,
    and since God’s intuition of possible essences, as imitations of
    His own Divine Essence, completely transcends our comprehension,
    and is totally different from our abstractive knowledge of such
    essences, our conception of the manner in which these essences are
    related to the Divine Nature and the Divine Attributes, must be
    determined after the analogy of the manner in which our own minds
    are related to these essences.


 . ESSENCES ARE INTRINSICALLY POSSIBLE, NOT BECAUSE GOD CAN MAKE THEM
EXIST ACTUALLY; NOR YET BECAUSE HE FREELY WILLS THEM TO BE POSSIBLE; NOR
BECAUSE HE UNDERSTANDS THEM AS POSSIBLE; BUT BECAUSE THEY ARE MODES IN
WHICH THE DIVINE ESSENCE IS IMITABLE _ad extra_.—(_a_) The ultimate source
of the _extrinsic_ possibility of all contingent realities is the Divine
Omnipotence: just as the proximate source of the extrinsic possibility of
a statue is the power of the sculptor to educe it from the block of wood
or marble. But just as the power of the sculptor presupposes the
_intrinsic_ possibility of the statue, so does the Divine Omnipotence
presuppose the intrinsic possibility of all possible things. It is not, as
William of Ockam (†  ), a scholastic of the decadent period,
erroneously thought, because God can create things that such things are
intrinsically possible, but rather because they are intrinsically possible
He can create them.

(_b_) Not less erroneous is the _voluntarist_ theory of Descartes,
according to which possible essences are intrinsically possible because
God freely willed them to be possible.( ) The _actuality_ of all created
things depends, of course, on the free will of God to create them; but
that possible essences are what they are, and are related to each other
necessarily as they are, because God has willed them to be such, is
absolutely incredible. Descartes seems to have been betrayed into this
strange error by a false notion of what is requisite for the absolute
freedom and independence of the Divine Will: as if this demanded that God
should be free to will, _e.g._ that two _plus_ two be five, or that the
radii of a circle be unequal, or that creatures be independent of Himself,
or that blasphemy be a virtuous act! The intrinsic possibility of essences
is _not_ dependent on the Free Will of God; the actualization of possible
essences is; but God can will to actualize only such essences as He sees,
from comprehending His own Divine Essence, to be intrinsically possible.
But it derogates in no way from the supremacy of the Divine Will to
conceive its free volition as thus consequent on, and illumined by, the
Divine Knowledge; whereas it is incompatible with the wisdom and sanctity
of God, as well as inconceivable to the human mind, that the necessary
laws of thought and being—such as the principles of contradiction and
identity, the principle of causality, the first principles of the moral
order—should be what they are simply because God has freely willed them to
be so, and might therefore have been otherwise.


    From the fact that we have no direct intuition of the Divine
    Being, some philosophers have concluded that all speculation on
    the relation of God to the world of our direct experience is
    necessarily barren and fruitless. This is a phase of agnosticism;
    and, like all error, it is the exaggeration of a truth: the truth
    being that while we may reach real knowledge about the Divine
    Nature and attributes by such speculation, we can do so only on
    condition that we are guided by analogies drawn from God’s
    creation, and remember that our concepts, as applied to God, are
    analogical ( ).

    “We can know God only by analogy with contingent and finite
    beings, and consequently the realities and laws of the contingent
    and finite world must necessarily serve as our term of comparison.
    But, among finite realities, we see an essential subordination of
    the extrinsically possible to the intelligible, of this to the
    intrinsically possible, and of this again to the essential type
    which is presupposed by our thought. Therefore, _a pari_, we must
    consider the omnipotent will of God, which is the first and
    universal cause of all [contingent] existences, as under the
    direction of the Divine Omniscience, and this in turn as having
    for its object the Divine Essence and in it the essential types
    whose intrinsic possibility is grounded on the necessary
    imitability of the Divine Being.

    “When, therefore, in defence of his position, Descartes argues
    that ‘In God willing and knowing are one and the same; the reason
    why He knows anything is because He wills it, and for this reason
    only can it be true: _Ex hoc ipso quod Deus aliquid velit, ideo
    cognoscit, et ideo tantum talis res est vera_’—he is only
    confusing the issue. We might, indeed, retort the argument: ‘In
    God willing and knowing are one and the same; the reason why He
    wills anything is because He knows it, and for this reason only
    can it be good: _Ex hoc ipso quod aliquid cognoscit, ideo vult, et
    ideo tantum talis res est bona_,’ but both inferences are equally
    unwarranted. For, though willing and knowing are certainly one and
    the same _in God_, this one and the same thing is formally and for
    our minds neither will nor intellect, but a reality transcending
    will and intellect, a substance infinitely above any substances
    known to us: ὑπερούσια, _supersubstantia_, as the Fathers of the
    Church and the Doctors of the Schools call it. But of this
    transcendent substance we have no intuitive knowledge. We must
    therefore either abandon all attempts to find out anything about
    it, or else apprehend it and designate it after the analogy of
    what we know from direct experience about created life and mind.
    And as in creatures will is not identical with intellect, nor
    either of these with the nature of the being that possesses them;
    so what we conceive in God under the concept of will, we must not
    identify in thought with what we conceive in Him under the concept
    of intellect, nor may we with impunity confound either in our
    thought with the Nature or Essence of the Divine Being.”( )


(_c_) Philosophers who deny the validity of all the arguments advanced by
theists in proof of the existence of a transcendent Supreme Being,
distinct from the world of direct human experience, endeavour to account
in various ways for the intrinsic possibility of abstract essences.
Agnostics either deny to these latter any reality whatsoever ( ), or else
declare the problem of their reality insoluble. Monists of the materialist
type—who try to reduce all mind to matter and its mere mechanical energies
( )—treat the question in a still more inadequate and unsatisfactory
manner; while the advocates of idealistic monism, like Hegel and his
followers, refer us to the supposed Immanent Mind of the universe for an
ultimate explanation of all intrinsic possibility. Certainly this must
have its ultimate source in some mind; and it is not in referring us to an
Eternal Mind that these philosophers err, but in their conception of the
relation of this mind to the world of direct actual experience. It is not,
however, with such theories we are concerned just now, but only with
theories put forward by theists. And among these latter it is surprising
to find some few( ) who maintain that the intrinsic possibility of
abstract essences depends ultimately and exclusively on these essences
themselves, irrespective of things actually experienced by the human mind,
irrespective of the human mind itself, and irrespective of the Divine Mind
and the Divine Nature.

As to this view, we have already seen ( ) that if we abstract from all
human minds, and from all actual things that can be directly experienced
by such minds, we are face to face either with the alternative of absolute
nothingness wherein the true and the false, the possible and the
impossible, cease to have any intelligible meaning, or else with the
alternative of a Supreme, Eternal, Necessary, Omniscient and Omnipotent
Being, whose actual existence has been, or can be, inferred from the
actual data of human experience. Now the theist, who admits the existence
of such a Being, cannot fail to see that possible essences must have their
primary ideal being in the Divine Intellect, and the ultimate source of
their intrinsic possibility in the Divine Essence Itself. For, knowing
that God can actualize intrinsically possible essences by the creative
act, which is intelligent and free, he will understand that these essences
have their ideal being in the Divine Intellect; that the Divine Intellect
sees their intrinsic possibility by contemplating the Divine Essence as
the Uncreated Prototype and Exemplar of all intrinsically possible things;
and that these latter are intrinsically possible precisely because they
are possible adumbrations or imitations of the Divine Nature.

(_d_) But are we to conceive that essences are intrinsically possible
precisely because the Divine Intellect, by understanding them, makes them
intrinsically possible? Or should we rather conceive their intrinsic
possibility as antecedent to this act by which the Divine Intellect
understands them, and as dependent only on the Divine Essence Itself, so
that essences would be intrinsically possible simply because the Divine
Essence is what it is, and because they are possible imitations or
expressions of it? Here scholastics are not agreed.

Some( ) hold that the intrinsic possibility of essences is _formally_
constituted by the act whereby the Divine Intellect, contemplating the
Divine Essence, understands the latter to be indefinitely imitable _ad
extra_; so that as the actuality of things results from the _Fiat_ of the
Divine Will, and as their extrinsic possibility is grounded in the Divine
Omnipotence, so their intrinsic possibility is grounded in the Divine
Intellect. The latter, by understanding the Divine Essence, would not
merely give an ideal being to the intrinsic possibility of essences, but
would make those essences _formally_ possible, they being only _virtually_
possible in the Divine Essence considered antecedently to this act of the
Divine Intellect. Or, rather, as some Scotists explain the matter,( )
this ideal being which possible essences have from the Divine Intellect is
not as extrinsic to them as the ideal being they have from the human
intellect, but is rather the very first being they can be said _formally_
to have, and is somehow intrinsic to them after the analogy of the being
which mere logical entities, _entia rationis_, derive from the human mind:
which being is intrinsic to these entities and is in fact the only being
they have or can have.

Others( ) hold that while, no doubt, possible essences have ideal being
in the Divine Intellect from the fact that they are objects of the Divine
Knowledge, yet we must not conceive these essences as deriving their
intrinsic possibility from the Divine Intellect. For intellect as such
presupposes its object. Just, therefore, as possible essences are not
intrinsically possible because they are understood by, and have ideal
being in, the human mind, so neither are they intrinsically possible
because they are understood by, and have ideal being in, the Divine Mind.
In order to be understood actually, in order to have ideal being, in order
to be objects of thought, they must be intelligible; and in order to be
intelligible they must be intrinsically possible. Therefore they are
formally constituted as intrinsically possible essences, not by the fact
that they are understood by the Divine Intellect, but by the fact that
antecedently to this act (in our way of conceiving the matter: for there
is _really_ no priority of acts or attributes in God) they are already
possible imitations of the Divine Essence Itself.

This view seems preferable as being more in accordance with the analogy of
what takes place in the human mind. The speculative intellect in man does
not constitute, but presupposes its object. Now, while _actual_ things are
the objects of God’s _practical science_—the “_scientia visionis_,” which
reaches what is freely decreed by the Divine Will,—_possible_ things are
the objects of God’s _speculative_ science—the “_scientia simplicis
intelligentiae_,” which is not, like the former, productive of its object,
but rather contemplative of objects presented to it by and in the Divine
Essence.

Why, then, ultimately will the notions “square” and “circle” not coalesce
so as to form one object of thought for the human mind, while the notions
“equilateral” and “triangle” will so coalesce? Because the Essence of God,
the Necessary Being, the First Reality, and the Source of all contingent
reality, affords no basis for the former as a possible expression or
imitation of Itself; in other words, because Being is not expressible by
nothingness, and a “square circle” is nothingness: while the Divine
Essence does afford a basis for the latter; because Necessary Being is in
some intelligible way imitated, expressed, manifested, by whatever has any
being to distinguish it from nothingness, and an “equilateral triangle”
has such being and is not nothingness.

It is hardly necessary to add that when we conceive the Divine Essence,
contemplated by the Divine Intellect, as containing in itself the
exemplars or prototypes of all possible things, we are not to understand
the Divine Essence as the _formal_ exemplar of each, or, _a fortiori_, as
a vast collection of such formally distinct exemplars; but only as
_virtually_ and _equivalently_ the exemplar of each and all. We are not to
conceive that possible essences are seen by the Divine Intellect imaged in
the Divine Essence _as in a mirror_, but rather _as in their supreme
source and principle_: so that they are faint and far off reflections of
It, and, when actualized, become for us the only means we have, in this
present state, for reaching any knowledge of the Deity: _videmus nunc per
speculum_.( )

 . DISTINCTION BETWEEN ESSENCE AND EXISTENCE IN ACTUALLY EXISTING
CONTINGENT OR CREATED BEINGS.—Passing now from the consideration of
possible essences as such, to the consideration of actually existing
essences, we have to examine a question which has given rise to a great
deal of controversy, partly on account of its inherent difficulty, and
partly because of a multitude of ambiguities arising from confusion of
thought: What is the nature of the distinction between essence and
existence in the actually existing things of our experience?

We have seen already that the _concepts_ of essence and existence are
distinct from each other ( ,  ); in other words, that in all cases there
is at least a _logical_ distinction between the essence and the existence
of any being. We must, however, distinguish between created or contingent
beings and the Uncreated, Necessary, Self-Existent Being. The latter
exists _essentially_, eternally, by His own Essence, so that in Him
essence and existence are _really identical_. His essence is _formally_
His Existence; and, therefore, in thinking of His Essence we cannot
positively exclude the notion of existence or think of Him as
non-existent. The distinction between essence and existence, which we find
in our thoughts, is, therefore, when applied to God, a _purely logical_
distinction, due solely to our finite human mode of thinking, and having
no ground or basis or reason in the reality which is the object of our
thought. On this there is complete unanimity among scholastic
philosophers.

But while we conceive that God actually exists by that whereby He is God,
by His Essence Itself, we do not conceive that any created or contingent
being exists by that whereby it is what it is, by its essence. We do not,
for example, regard the essence of Socrates, whether specific or
individual (that whereby he is a _man_, or that whereby he is _this_ man,
Socrates), as that whereby he actually exists. In other words, the essence
of the existing Socrates, being a contingent essence, does not necessarily
demand or imply that it actually exist. Our concept of such an essence
does not include the note of actual existence. Therefore if we find such
an essence actually existing we consider this actually existing essence as
caused or produced, and conserved in existence, by some other being,
_viz._ by the Necessary Being: so that if it were not so created and
conserved it would be a pure possibility and nothing actual.( ) The same
difference between the Necessary Being and contingent beings will be seen
from considering their existence. The abstract concept of existence is
rendered definite and determinate by the essence which it actualizes. Now
every finite essence is of some particular kind; and its existence is
rendered determinate by the fact that it is the existence of a definite
kind of essence. The existence of a contingent being we conceive as the
actuality of its essence; and its essence as a definite potentiality of
existence. Thus if we conceive existence as a perfection it is restricted
by the finite nature of the potentiality which it actualizes. But the
existence of the Necessary Being is the plenitude of actuality, an
existence not restricted by being the existence of any essence that is
determinate because finite, but of an essence that is determinate by being
above all genera and species, by being infinite, by being Itself pure
actuality, in no sense potential but perfectly and formally identical with
actual existence. While, therefore, the essence of the Necessary Being is
a necessarily existing essence, that of a contingent being is not
necessarily existent, but is conceived as a potentiality which has been
_de facto_ actualized or made existent by the Necessary Being, and which
may again cease to be actually existent.( ) On this too there is
unanimity among scholastic philosophers.

We distinguish mentally or logically between the essence of an actually
existing contingent being and its existence; considering the former as the
potential principle, in relation to the latter as the actualizing
principle, of the contingent existing reality. But is the distinction
between such an essence and its existence something more than a logical
distinction? Is it a real distinction? This is the question in dispute.
And in order to avoid misunderstanding, we must be clear on these two
points: firstly, of what essence and existence is there question? and
secondly, what exactly are we to understand by a real distinction in this
matter?

 . STATE OF THE QUESTION.—In the first place, there is no question here
of the relation of a _possible_ essence as such to existence. The possible
essence of a contingent being, as such, has no reality outside the Divine
Essence, Intellect, Will, and Omnipotence. Before the world was created
the possible essences of all the beings that constitute it were certainly
really distinct from the actual existence of these beings which do
constitute the created universe. On this point there can be no difference
of opinion. To contend that it is on the eternal reality of the possible
essence that actual existence supervenes, when a contingent being begins
to exist, would be equivalent to contending that it is the Divine Essence
that becomes actual in the phenomena of our experience: which is the error
of Pantheism.

Again, before a contingent thing comes into actual existence it may be
virtually and potentially in the active powers and passive potentialities
of other actually existing contingent things: as the oak, for instance, is
in the passive potentiality of the acorn and in the active powers of the
natural agencies whereby it is evolved from the acorn; or the statue in
the block of marble and in the mind and artistic power of the sculptor.
But neither is there any question here of the relation of such potential
being or essence as a thing has in its causes to the actual existence of
this thing when actually produced. Whatever being or essence it has in its
active and passive causes is certainly really distinct from the existence
which the thing has when it has been actually produced. Nor is there any
doubt or dispute about this point. At the same time much controversy is
due to misunderstandings arising from a confusion of thought which fails
to distinguish between the essence as purely possible, the essence as
virtually or potentially in its causes, and the essence as actually
existing. It is about the distinction between the latter and its existence
that the whole question is raised. And it must be borne in mind that this
essence, whether it is really distinct from its existence or not, is
itself a positive reality from the moment it is created or produced. The
question is whether the creative or productive act—whereby this essence is
placed “outside its causes,” and is now no longer merely possible, or
merely virtual or potential in its causes, but something real _in
itself_—has for its term _one reality_, or _two realities_, _viz._ the
essence as real subjective potentiality of existence, and the existential
act or perfection whereby it is constituted actually existent.( )

The question is exclusively concerned with the essence which began to
exist when the contingent being came into actual existence, and which
ceases to exist when, or if, this being again passes out of actual
existence; and the question is whether this essence which actually exists
is really distinct from the existence whereby it actually exists. Finally,
the question concerns the essence and existence of any and every actual
contingent reality, whether such reality be a substance or an accident. Of
course it is primarily concerned with the essence and existence of
substances; but it also applies to the essence and existence of accidents
in so far as these latter will be found to be really distinct from the
substances in which they inhere, and to have reality proper to themselves.

 . THE THEORY OF DISTINCTIONS IN ITS APPLICATION TO THE QUESTION.—In the
next place, what are we to understand by a _real_ distinction in this
matter? Ambiguity and obscurity of thought in regard to the theory of
_distinctions_, and in regard to the application of the theory to the
present question, has been probably the most fertile source of much
tedious and fruitless controversy in this connexion.

Anticipating what will be considered more fully at a later stage ( ), we
must note here the two main classes of distinction which, by reflecting on
our thought-processes, we discover between the objects of our thought. The
_real_ distinction is that which exists in things independently of the
consideration of our minds; that which is discovered, but not made, by the
mind; that which is given to us in and with the data of our experience.
For example, the act of thinking is a reality other than, and therefore
_really_ distinct from, the mind that thinks; for the mind persists after
the act of thinking has passed away.

Opposed to this is the mental or logical distinction, which is the
distinction made by the mind itself between two different concepts of one
and the same reality; which is not in the reality independently of our
thought, but is introduced into it by our thought, regarding the same
reality under different aspects or from different points of view. The mind
never makes such a distinction without some ground or reason for doing so.

Sometimes, however, this reason will be found exclusively in the mind
itself—in the limitations of its modes of thought—and not in the reality
which is the matter or object of the thought. The distinction is then said
to be _purely_ logical or mental. Such distinctions are _entia rationis_,
logical entities. An example would be the distinction between the concept
“man” and the concept “rational animal,” or, in general, between any
definable object of thought and its definition; the distinction,
therefore, between the essence and the existence of the Necessary Being is
a purely logical distinction, for in a definition it is the essence of the
thing we define, and existence is of the essence or definition of the
Necessary Being.

Sometimes, again, the reason for making a mental distinction will be found
in the reality itself. What is one and the same reality presents different
aspects to the mind and evokes different concepts of itself in the mind:
though really one, it is virtually manifold; and the distinction between
the concepts of these various aspects is commonly known as a _virtual_
distinction. For example, when we think of any individual man as a
“rational animal,” though our concept of “animal nature” is distinct from
that of “rational nature,” we do not regard these in him as two realities
co-existing or combining to form his human nature, but only as two
distinct aspects under which we view the one reality which is his human
nature. And we view it under these two aspects because we have actual
experience of instances in which animal nature is really distinct and
separated from rationality, _e.g._, in the brute beast. Or, again, since
we can recognize three grades of life in man—vegetative, sentient, and
rational—we conceive the one principle of life, his soul, as virtually
three principles; and so we distinguish mentally or virtually between
three souls in man, although in reality there is only one. Or, once more,
when we think of the Wisdom, the Will, and the Omnipotence of God, we know
that although these concepts represent different aspects of the Deity,
these aspects are not distinct realities in Him; but that because of His
infinite perfection and infinite simplicity they are all objectively one
and the same self-identical reality.

A virtual distinction is said to be _imperfect_ (thus approaching nearer
to the nature of a purely logical distinction) when each of the concepts
whereby we apprehend the same reality only prescinds _explicitly_ from
what is expressed by the other, although one of them is found on analysis
to include _implicitly_ what is expressed by the other. Such is the
distinction between the _being_ and the _life_ of any living thing; or the
distinction between the spirituality and the immortality of the human
soul; or the distinction between _Infinite_ Wisdom and _Infinite_ Power:
the distinction between the divine attributes in general. A virtual
distinction is said to be _perfect_ (thus approaching nearer to the nature
of a real distinction) when neither of the concepts includes either
explicitly or implicitly what is expressed by the other. Such, for
instance, is the distinction between the principle of intellectual life
and the principle of animal or sentient life in man; for not only can
these exist separately (the former without the latter, _e.g._ in pure
spirits, the latter without the former, _e.g._ in brute beasts), but also
it will be found that by no analysis does either concept in any way
involve the other.( )

Our only object in setting down the various examples just given is to
illustrate the general scholastic teaching on the doctrine of distinction.
In themselves they are not beyond dispute, for the general doctrine of
distinction is not easy of application in detail; but they will be
sufficient for our present purpose. Probably the greatest difficulty in
applying the general doctrine will be found to lie in discriminating
between virtual distinctions—especially perfect virtual distinctions—and
real distinctions.( ) And this difficulty will be appreciated still more
when we learn that a real distinction does not necessarily involve
_separability_ of the objects so distinguished. In other words there may
be, in a composite existing individual being, constitutive factors or
principles, or integral parts, each of which is a positive real entity,
really distinct from the others, and yet incapable of existing separately
or in isolation from the others. “Separability,” says Mercier,( ) “is
one of the signs of a real distinction; but it is neither essential to,
nor a necessary property of the latter. Two separable things are of course
really distinct from each other; but two entities may be really distinct
from each other without being separable or capable of existing apart from
each other. Thus we believe that the intellect and the will in man are
really distinct from each other, and both alike from the substance of the
human soul; yet they cannot exist isolated from the soul.” Therefore, even
though the objects which we apprehend as distinct, by means of distinct
concepts, be understood to be such that they cannot actually exist in
isolation from each other, but only as united in a composite individual
being, still if it can be shown that each of them has its own proper
reality independently of our thought, so that the distinction between them
is not the result of our thought, or introduced by our thought into the
individual thing or being which we are considering, then the distinction
must be regarded as real. If, on the other hand, it can be shown that the
different aspects which we apprehend in any _datum_ by means of distinct
concepts have not, apart from the consideration of the mind, apart from
the analytic activity of our own thought, each its own proper reality, but
are only distinct mental views of what is objectively one and the same
reality, then the distinction must be regarded as logical, not real,—and
this even although there may be in the richness and fulness of that one
reality comparatively to the limited capacity of our minds, as well as in
the very constitution and modes of thought of our minds themselves, a
reason or basis for, and an explanation of, the _multiplicity of concepts_
whereby we attain to an understanding of some _one reality_.

 . SOLUTIONS OF THE QUESTION.—Postponing further consideration of the
serious problems on the validity of knowledge and its relation to reality,
to which those reflections inevitably give rise, let us now return to the
main question: the nature of the distinction between the essence and the
existence of any actually existing contingent being. We need not be
surprised to find that the greatest minds have been unable to reach the
same solution of this question. For it is but a phase of the more general
metaphysical problem—at once both ontological and epistemological—of the
nature of reality and the relation of the human mind thereto. Nor will any
serious modern philosopher who is at all mindful of the wealth of current
controversial literature on this very problem, or of the endless variety
of conflicting opinions among contemporary thinkers in regard to it, be
disposed to ridicule the medieval controversies on the doctrine of
distinction as applied to essence and existence. No doubt there has been a
good deal of mere verbal, and perhaps trifling, argumentation on the
matter: it lends itself to the dialectical skill of the controversialist
who “takes sides,” as well as to the serious thought of the open-minded
investigator. It is not, however, through drawing different conclusions
from the same premisses that conflicting solutions of the question have
been reached, but rather through fundamentally different attitudes in
regard to the premisses themselves which different philosophers profess to
find in the common data of their experience. When we have once grasped
what philosophers mean by a logical or a real distinction as applied to
the relation between essence and existence we shall not get any very
material assistance towards the choice of a solution by considering at
length the arguments adduced on either side.( )

Those who believe there is a real distinction( ) between the essence and
the existence of all actually existing contingent beings mean by this that
the real essence which comes into actual existence by creation, or by the
action of created causes, is a reality distinct from the existence whereby
it actually exists. The actually existing essence is the total term of the
creative or productive act; but what we apprehend in it under the concept
of _essence_ is really distinct from what we apprehend in it under the
concept of _existence_: the existence being a real principle which
_actualizes_ the essence, and this latter being itself another real
principle which is in itself a positive, subjective _potentiality_ of
existence.( ) Neither, of course, can actually exist without the other:
no actual existence except that of a real essence; no existing essence
except by reason of the existence which makes it actual. But these two
real principles of existing contingent being, inseparable as they are and
correlative, are nevertheless distinct realities—distinct in the objective
order and independently of our thought,—and form by their union a really
_composite_ product: the existing thing.


    We might attempt to illustrate this by the analogy of a body and
    its shape or colour. The body itself is really distinct from its
    actual shape and colour: it may lose them, and yet remain the same
    body; and it may acquire other shapes and colours. At any time the
    body has actually some particular shape and colour; but that by
    which it is formally so shaped and coloured is something really
    different from the body itself. Furthermore, before the body
    _actually_ possessed this particular shape and colour, these were
    in it _potentially_: that is to say, there were then in the body
    the real, passive, subjective potentialities of this particular
    shape and colour. So too _that by which_ a real (contingent)
    essence actually exists (_i.e._ the existential _act_, existence)
    is really distinct from _that which_ actually exists (_i.e._ the
    essence, the _potentiality_ of that existential act). The analogy
    is, however, at best only a halting one. For while it is
    comparatively easy to understand how the passive, subjective
    _potentiality_ of a shape or colour can be _something real_ in the
    _already actually existing_ body, it is not so easy to understand
    how the _potentiality of existence_, _i.e._ the real essence, can
    be anything that is itself real and really distinct from the
    existence.( ) The oak is _really_ in the acorn, for the passive,
    subjective potentiality of the oak is in the actual acorn; but is
    this potentiality anything really distinct from the acorn? or
    should we not rather say that the _actual_ acorn _is potentially_
    the oak, or _is_ the potentiality of the oak? At all events even
    if it is really distinct from the actual acorn, it is in the
    actual acorn. But is it possible to conceive a _real, subjective
    potentiality_ which _does not reside in anything actual_?( ) Now
    if the real essence is really distinct from its existence it must
    be conceived as a _real, subjective potentiality_ of existence.
    Yet it cannot be conceived as a potentiality _in_ anything actual:
    except indeed in the actually existing essence which is the
    composite result of its union with the existential act. It is not
    a real, subjective potentiality antecedently to the existential
    act, and on which the latter is, as it were, superimposed:( ) in
    itself, it is, in fact, nothing real except as actualized by the
    latter; but, as we have already observed, the process of
    actualization, whether by direct creation or by the action of
    created causes, must be conceived as having for its total term or
    effect a composite reality resulting from what we can at best
    imperfectly describe as the union of two correlative, con-created,
    or co-produced principles of being, a potential and an actual,
    really distinct from each other: that whereby the thing _can_
    exist, the potentiality of existence, the essence; and that
    whereby the thing _does_ exist, the actuality of essence, the
    existence. The description is imperfect because these principles
    are not con-created or co-produced separately; but, rather, the
    creation or production of an existing essence, the efficiency by
    which it is “placed outside its causes,” has one single, though
    composite, term: the actually existing thing.


This view, thus advocating a real distinction between essence and
existence, may obviously be regarded as an emphatic expression of the
objective validity of intellectual knowledge. It might be regarded as an
application of the more general view that the objective concepts between
which the intellect distinguishes in its interpretation of reality should
be regarded as representing _distinct realities_, except when the
distinction is seen to arise not from the nature of the object but from
the nature of the subject, from the limitations and imperfections of our
own modes of thought. But in the case of any particular (disputed)
distinction, the _onus probandi_ should lie rather on the side of those
who contend that such distinction is logical, and not real. On the other
hand, many philosophers who are no less firmly convinced of the objective
validity of intellectual knowledge observe that it is possible to push
this principle too far, or rather to err by excess in its application.
Instead of placing the burden of proof solely on the side of the logical
distinction, they would place it rather more on the side of the real
distinction—in conformity with the maxim of method, _Entia non sunt
multiplicanda praeter necessitatem_. And they think that it is an error by
excess to hold the distinction between essence and existence to be real.
This brings us to the second alternative opinion: that the distinction in
question is not real, but only virtual.( )

According to this view, the essence and the existence of any existing
contingent being are one and the same reality. There is, however, in this
reality a basis for the two distinct objective concepts—of essence and of
existence—whereby we apprehend it. For the contingent being does not exist
necessarily: we see such beings coming into existence and ceasing to
exist: we can therefore think of _what they are_ without thinking of them
as _actually existent_: in other words, we can think of them as possible,
and of their existence as that by which they become actual. This is a
sufficient reason for distinguishing mentally, in the existing being, the
essence which exists and the existence by which it exists.( ) But when
we think of the essence of an actually existing being as objectively
possible, or as potential in its causes, we are no longer thinking of it
as anything real in itself, but only of its ideal being as an object of
thought in our minds, or of the ideal being it has in the Divine Mind, or
of the potential being it has in created causes, or of the virtual being
it has in the Divine Omnipotence, or of the ultimate basis of its
possibility in the Divine Essence. But all these modes of “being” we know
to be really distinct from the real, contingent essence itself which
begins to exist actually in time, and may cease once more to exist in time
when and if its own nature demands, and God wills, such cessation. But
that the real, contingent essence itself which so exists, is something
really distinct from the existence whereby it exists; that it forms with
the latter a really composite being; that it is in itself a real,
subjective potentiality, receptive of existence as another and actualizing
reality, really distinct from it, so that the creation or production of
any single actually existing contingent being would have for its term two
really distinct principles of being, a potential and an actual, essence
and existence, created or produced _per modum unius_, so to speak: for
asserting all this it is contended by supporters of the virtual
distinction that we have no sufficient justifying reason.( ) Hence they
conclude that a real distinction must be denied: _Entia non sunt
multiplicanda praeter necessitatem_.


    Though each of these opinions has been defended with a great deal
    of ability, and an exhaustive array of arguments, a mere rehearsal
    of these latter would not give much material assistance towards a
    solution of the question. We therefore abstain from repeating them
    here. There are only a few points in connexion with them to which
    attention may be directed.

    In the first place, some defenders of the real distinction urge
    that were the distinction not real, things would exist
    essentially, _i.e._ necessarily; and thus the most fundamental
    ground of distinction between God and creatures, between the
    Necessary Being and contingent beings, would be destroyed:
    creatures would be no longer in their very constitution composite,
    mixtures of potentiality and actuality, but would be purely
    actual, absolutely simple and, in a word, identical with the
    Infinite Being Himself. Supporters of the virtual distinction deny
    that those very serious consequences follow from their view. They
    point out that though the existence of the creature is really
    identical with its essence, the essence does not exist necessarily
    or _a se_; the whole existing essence is _ab alio_, is caused,
    contingent; and the fundamental distinction between such a being
    and the Self-Existing Being is in this view perfectly clear. Nor
    is the creature, they contend, purely actual and absolutely
    simple; it need not have existed, and it may cease to exist; it
    has, therefore, a potentiality of non-existence, which is
    inconceivable in the case of the Necessary and purely Actual
    Being; it is, therefore, mutable as regards existence; besides
    which the essences even of the most simple created beings, namely
    pure spirits are composite in the sense that they have faculties
    and operations really distinct from their substance.

    Secondly, it is alleged by some defenders of the real distinction
    that this latter view of the nature of existing contingent reality
    is a cardinal doctrine in the whole philosophical system of St.
    Thomas, and of scholastics generally: so fundamental, in fact,
    that many important doctrines, unanimously held to be true by all
    scholastics, cannot be successfully vindicated apart from it.( )
    To which it is replied that there are no important truths of
    scholastic philosophy which cannot be defended quite adequately
    apart altogether from the view one may hold on the present
    question; and that, this being the case, it is unwise to endeavour
    to base admittedly true doctrines, which can be better defended
    otherwise, upon an opinion which can at best claim only the amount
    of probability it can derive from the intrinsic merits of the
    arguments by which it is itself supported.( )

    Before passing from this whole question we must note the existence
    of a third school of thought, identified mainly with the followers
    of Duns Scotus.( ) These authors contend that the distinction
    between essence and existence is not a real distinction, nor yet,
    on the other hand, is it merely a virtual distinction, but one
    which they call _formalis, actualis ex natura rei_, that between a
    reality and its intrinsic modes. It is better known as the
    “Scotistic” distinction. We shall see the nature of it when
    dealing _ex professo_ with the general doctrine of distinctions.

    The multiplicity of these views, and the unavoidable difficulty
    experienced in grasping and setting forth their meaning with any
    tolerable degree of clearness, would suggest the reflection that
    in those controversies the medieval scholastics were perhaps
    endeavouring to think and to express what reality is, apart from
    thought and “independently of the consideration of the mind”—a
    task which, conceived in these terms, must appear fruitless; and
    one which, anyhow, involves in its very nature the closest
    scrutiny of the epistemological problem of the power of the human
    mind to get at least a true and valid, if not adequate and
    comprehensive, insight into the nature of reality.





CHAPTER IV. REALITY AS ONE AND MANIFOLD.


 . THE TRANSCENDENTAL ATTRIBUTES OR PROPERTIES OF BEING: UNITY, TRUTH,
AND GOODNESS.—So far, we have analysed the notions of Real Being, of
Becoming or Change, of Being as Possible and as Actual, of Essence and
Existence. Before approaching a study of the Categories or _Suprema Genera
Entis_, the highest and widest modes in which reality manifests itself, we
have next to consider certain attributes or properties of being which
reveal themselves as co-extensive with reality itself. Taking human
experience in its widest sense, as embracing all modes that are cognitive
or allied with consciousness, as including intellect, memory, imagination,
sense perception, will and appetite, as speculative, ethical or moral, and
esthetic or artistic,—we find that the reality which makes up this complex
human experience of ours is universally and necessarily characterized by
certain features which we call the _transcendental attributes or
properties of being_, inasmuch as they transcend all specific and generic
modes of being, pervade all its categories equally, and are inseparable
from any datum of experience. We shall see that they are not really
distinct from the reality which they characterize, but only logically
distinct from it, being aspects under which we apprehend it, negations or
other logical relations which we necessarily annex to it by the mental
processes whereby we seek to render it actually intelligible to our minds.

The first in order of these ontological attributes is _unity_: the concept
of that whereby reality considered in itself becomes a definite object of
thought. The second in order is _truth_: which is the conception of
reality considered in its relation to cognitive experience, to intellect.
The third is _goodness_: the aspect under which reality is related as an
object to appetitive experience, to will.

Now when we predicate of any reality under our consideration that it is
“one,” or “good,” or “true”—in the ontological sense to be explained,—that
which we predicate is not a mere _ens rationis_, but something real,
something which is really identical with the subject, and which is
distinguished from the latter in our judgment only by a logical
distinction. The attribution of any of these properties to the subject
does not, however, add anything real to the latter: it adds merely some
logical aspect involved in, or supposed by, the attribution. At the same
time, this logical aspect gives us real information by making explicit
some real feature of being not explicitly revealed in the concept of being
itself, although involved in, and following as a property from, the
latter.

There do not seem to be any other transcendental properties of being
besides the three enumerated. The terms “reality,” “thing,” “something,”
are synonymous expressions of the concept of being itself, rather than of
properties of being. “Existence” is not a transcendental attribute of
being, for it is not co-extensive with reality or real being. And although
reality _must_ be “_either_ possible _or_ actual,” “_either_ necessary
_or_ contingent,” “_either_ infinite _or_ finite,” etc., this necessity of
verifying in itself one or other member of any such alternatives is not a
property of being, but rather something essentially rooted in the very
concept of reality itself. Some would regard as a distinct transcendental
attribute of being the conception of the latter as an object of esthetic
contemplation, as manifesting order and harmony, as _beautiful_. This
conception of being will be found, however, to flow from the more
fundamental aspects of reality considered as _true_ and as _good_, rather
than directly from the concept of being itself.

 . TRANSCENDENTAL UNITY.—When we think of anything as one we think of it
as undivided in itself. The unity or oneness of being is the undividedness
of being: _Unum est id quod est indivisum in se: Universaliter quaecunque
non habent divisionem, inquantum non habent, sic unum dicuntur_.( )
When, therefore, we conceive being as undivided into constitutive parts,
and unmultiplied into repetitions of itself, we conceive it as _a_ being,
as _one_. For the concept of being, formally as one, it does not seem
necessary that we conceive being as _divided or distinct from all other
being_. This second negation, of identity with other being, rather follows
the conception of being as one: being is distinct from other being because
it is already itself one: it is a prior negation that formally constitutes
its unity, namely, _the negation of internal division or multiplication of
itself_: God was truly _one_ from all eternity, before there was any
_other_ being, any created being, distinct from Him. The division or
distinction of an object of thought from whatever is not itself is what
constitutes the notion of _otherness_.( )

It is manifest that being and unity are really identical, that when we
think of being we think of what is really undivided in itself, that once
we introduce dividedness into the object of our concept we are no longer
thinking of being but of _beings_, _i.e._ of a multitude or plurality each
member of which is a _being_ and _one_. For being, as an object of
thought, is either simple or composite. If simple, it is not only
undivided but indivisible. If composite, we cannot think of it as _a_
being, capable of existing, so long as we think its parts as separate or
divided: only when we think of them as actually united and undivided have
we the concept of _a_ being: and _eo ipso_ we have the concept of being as
one, as a unity.( )

Hence the scholastic formulæ: _Ens et unum convertuntur_, and _Omne ens
est unum_. The truth embodied in these is so self-evident that the
expression of it may seem superfluous; but they are not mere tautologies,
and in the interests of clear and consistent thinking our attention may be
profitably directed to them. The same remark applies to much in the
present and subsequent chapters on the transcendental attributes of being.

 . KINDS OF UNITY.—(_a_) The unity we have been describing has been
called _transcendental_, to distinguish it from _predicamental_ unity—the
unity which is proper to a special category of being, namely, _quantity_,
and which, accordingly, is also called _quantitative_ or _mathematical_
unity. While the former is common to all being, with which it is really
identical, and to which it adds nothing real, the latter belongs and is
applicable, properly speaking, only to the mode of being which is
corporeal, which exists only as affected by quantity, as occupying space,
as capable of measurement; and therefore, also, this latter unity adds
something real to the being which it affects, namely, the attribute of
quantity, of which unity is the measure and the generating principle.( )
For quantity, as we shall see, is a mode of being really distinct from the
corporeal substance which it affects. The quantity has its own
transcendental unity; so has the substance which it quantifies; so has the
composite whole, the quantified body, but this latter transcendental
unity, like the composite being with which it is identical, is not a _unum
per se_ but only a _unum per accidens_ (_cf._ _b_, _infra_).

We derive our notion of quantitative or mathematical unity, which is the
principle of counting and the standard of measuring, from dividing
mentally the continuous quantity or magnitude which is one of the
immediate data of sense experience. Now the distinction between this unit
and transcendental unity supposes not merely that quantity is really
distinct from the corporeal substance, but also that the human mind is
capable of conceiving as real certain modes of being other than the
corporeal, modes to which quantitative concepts and processes, such as
counting and measuring, are not _properly_ applicable, as they are to
corporeal reality, but only in an _analogical_ or _transferred_ sense ( ).
The notion of transcendental unity, therefore, bears the same relation to
that of quantitative unity, as the notion of being in general bears to
that of quantified or corporeal being.

(_b_) Transcendental unity may be either _essential_ (or _substantial_,
“unum _per se_,” “unum _simpliciter_”), or _accidental_ (“unum _per
accidens_,” “unum _secundum quid_”). The former characterizes a being
which has nothing in it beyond what is essential to it as such, _e.g._ the
unity of any substance: and this unity is twofold—( ) _unity of
simplicity_ and ( ) _unity of composition_—according as the substance is
essentially simple (such as the human soul or a pure spirit) or
essentially composite (such as man, or any corporeal substance: since
every such substance is composed essentially of a formative and an
indeterminate principle).( )

Accidental unity is the unity of a being whose constituent factors or
contents are not really united in such a way as to form one essence,
whether simple or composite. It is threefold: ( ) _collective_ unity, or
unity _of aggregation_, as of a _heap_ of stones or a _crowd_ of men; ( )
_artificial_ unity, as of a house or a picture; and ( ) _natural_ or
_physical_ unity, as of any existing substance with its connatural
accidents, _e.g._ a living organism with its size, shape, qualities, etc.,
or the human soul with its faculties.( )

(_c_) Transcendental unity may be either individual (singular, numerical,
concrete, real) or universal (specific, generic, abstract, logical). The
former is that which characterizes being or reality considered as actually
existing or as proximately capable of existing: the unity of an
_individual_ nature or essence: the unity whereby a being is not merely
undivided in itself but incapable of repetition or multiplication of
itself. It is only the individual as such that can actually exist: the
abstract and universal is incapable of actually existing as such. We shall
examine presently what it is that _individuates_ reality, and what it is
that renders it capable of existing actually in the form of “things” or of
“persons”—the forms in which it actually presents itself in our
experience.

Abstract or universal unity is the unity which characterizes a reality
conceived as an abstract, universal object by the human intellect. The
object of a specific or generic concept, “man” or “animal,” for example,
is one in this sense, undivided in itself, but capable of indefinite
multiplication or repetition in the only mode in which it can actually
exist—the individual mode. The universal is _unum aptum inesse pluribus_.

Finally, we can conceive any nature or essence without considering it in
either of its alternative states—either as individual or as universal.
Thus conceived it is characterized by a unity which has been commonly
designated as _abstract_, or (by Scotists) as _formal_ unity.

 . MULTITUDE AND NUMBER.—The _one_ has for its correlative the
_manifold_. Units, one of which is not the other, constitute multitude or
plurality. If unity is the negation of actual division in being, multitude
results from a second negation, that, namely, by which the undivided being
or unit is marked off or divided from other units.( ) We have defined
unity by the negation of actual _intrinsic_ dividedness; and we have seen
it to be compatible with _extrinsic_ dividedness, or otherness. Thus the
vague notion of dividedness is anterior to that of unity. Now multitude
involves dividedness; but it also involves and presupposes the intrinsic
undividedness or _unity_ of each constituent of the manifold. In the real
order of things the _one_ is prior to all _dividedness_; but on account of
the sensuous origin of our concepts we can define the former only by
exclusion of the latter. The order in which we obtain these ideas seems,
therefore, to be as follows: “first _being_, then _dividedness_, next
_unity_ which excludes dividedness, and finally _multitude_ which consists
of units”.( )

The relation of the _one_ to the _manifold_ is that of undivided being to
divided being. The same reality cannot be one and manifold under the same
aspect; though obviously a being may be actually one and potentially
manifold or _vice versa_, or one under a certain aspect and manifold under
another aspect.

From the transcendental plurality or multitude which we have just
described we can distinguish _predicamental_ or _quantitative_ plurality:
a distinction which is to be understood in the same way as when applied to
unity. Quantitative multitude is the actually separated or divided
condition of quantified being. _Number_ is a multitude measured or counted
by unity: it is a _counted_, and, therefore, necessarily a _definite_ and
_finite_ multitude. Now it is _mathematical_ unity that is, properly, the
principle of number and the standard or measure of all counting; and
therefore it is only to realities which fall within the category of
quantity—in other words, to material being—that the concept of number is
properly applicable. No doubt we can and do conceive transcendental unity
after the analogy of the quantitative unity which is the principle of
counting and measuring; and no doubt we can use the transcendental concept
of “actually undivided being” as a principle of enumeration, and so
“count” or “enumerate” spiritual beings; but this counting is only
analogical; and many philosophers, following Aristotle and St. Thomas,
hold that the concepts of _numerical_ multiplicity and _numerical_
distinction are not properly applicable to immaterial beings, that these
latter differ individually from one another _not numerically_, but each by
its whole nature or essence, that is, _formally_.( )

 . THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE UNIVERSAL.—We have distinguished transcendental
unity into individual and universal ( , _c_). Reality as endowed with
universal unity is reality as apprehended by abstract thought to be
capable of indefinite repetition or multiplication of itself in actual
existence. Reality as endowed with individual unity is reality apprehended
as actually existing, or as proximately capable of actually existing, and
as therefore incapable of any repetition or multiplication of itself, of
any division of itself into other “selves” or communication of itself to
other “selves”. While, therefore, the universal has its reality only in
the individuals to which it communicates itself, and which thus embody it,
the individual has its reality in itself and of its own right, so to
speak: when it actually exists it is “_sui juris_,” and as such
incommunicable, “_incommunicabilis_”. The actually existing individual is
called in Latin a “_suppositum_”—a term which we shall render by the
English “thing” or “individual thing”. It was called by Aristotle the
οὐσία πρωτή, _substantia prima_, “first substance,” or “first essence,” to
distinguish it from the substance or essence conceived by abstract thought
as universal; the latter being designated as οὐσία δέυτερα, _substantia
secunda_, “second substance” or “second essence”.

Now it is a fundamental assumption in Aristotelian and scholastic
philosophy that whatever actually exists, or whatever is real in the sense
that as such it is proximately capable of actual existence, is and must be
individual: that the universal as such is not real, _i.e._ as such cannot
actually exist. And the manifest reason for this assumption is that
whatever actually exists must be, with entire definiteness and
determinateness, its own self and nothing else: it cannot be capable of
division or repetition of itself, of that which it really is, into “other”
realities which would still be “that individual thing”. But reality
considered as universal _is_ capable of such repetition of itself
indefinitely. Therefore reality cannot actually exist as universal, but
only as individual.


    This is merely plain common sense; nor does the idealistic monism
    which appears to attribute reality to the universal as such, and
    which interprets reality exclusively according to the forms in
    which it presents itself to abstract thought, really run counter
    to this consideration; for what it really holds is not that
    universals as such are real, but that they are phases of the
    all-one reality which is itself _one individual being_.

    But many modern philosophers hold that individuality, no less than
    universality, is a form of thought. No doubt “individuality” _in
    the abstract_ is, no less than universality, an object abstracted
    from the data of experience by the mind’s analysis of the latter.
    But this is not what those philosophers mean. They mean that the
    individual as such is not a real datum of experience. From the
    Kantian view that individuality is a purely mental form with which
    the mind invests the datum, they draw the subjectivist conclusion
    that the world, thus interpreted as consisting of “individuals,”
    is a phenomenal or mental product for the objective validity of
    which there can be to man’s speculative reason no sufficient
    guarantee.

    To this theory we oppose that of Aristotle and the scholastics,
    not merely that the individual alone is actually existent, but
    that as actually existent and as individual it is actually given
    to us and apprehended by us in internal and external sense
    experience; and that although in the inorganic world, and to some
    extent in the lower forms of life, we may not be able to determine
    for certain what portions of this experience are distinct
    individuals, still in the world of living things generally, and
    especially of the animal kingdom, there can be no difficulty in
    determining this, for the simple reason that here reality is given
    to us in sense experience as consisting of distinct individuals.


At the same time it is true that we can understand these individual
realities, interpret them, read the meaning of them, only by the
intellectual function of judgment, _i.e._ by the analytic and synthetic
activity whereby we abstract and universalize certain aspects of them, and
use these aspects as predicates of the individuals. Now, seeing that
intellectual thought, as distinct from sense experience, apprehends its
objects only as abstract and potentially universal, only as static,
self-identical, possible essences, and nevertheless predicates these of
the concrete, individual, contingent, actually existing “things” of sense
experience, identifying them with the latter in affirmative judgments;
seeing moreover, that—since the intellectual knowledge we thus acquire
about the data of sense experience is genuine and not chimerical—those
“objects” of abstract thought must be likewise real, and must be really in
those individual sense data (according to the theory of knowledge which
finds its expression in Moderate Realism),—there arises immediately the
problem, or rather the group of problems, regarding the relations between
reality as revealed to intellect, _i.e._ as abstract and universal, and
reality as revealed to sense, _i.e._ as concrete and individual. In other
words, we have to inquire how we are to interpret intellectually the fact
that reality, which as a possible essence is _universal_ for abstract
thought, is nevertheless, as actually existing, _individualized_ for
sense—and consequently for intellect reflecting on the data of sense.( )

 . THE “METAPHYSICAL GRADES OF BEING” IN THE INDIVIDUAL.—What, then is
the relation between all that intellect can apprehend in the individual,
_viz._ its lowest class essence or specific nature, and its whole nature
as an individual, its _essentia atoma_ or individual nature? We can best
approach this problem by considering first these various abstract
thought-objects which intellect can apprehend in the individual.

What are called the metaphysical grades of being, those positive moments
of perfection or reality which the mind detects in the individual, as, for
instance, substantiality, materiality, organic life, animality,
rationality, individuality, in the individual man—whether we describe them
as “phases” or “aspects” or “formalities” of being—are undoubtedly
distinct objects for abstract thought. Why does it thus distinguish
between them, and express them by distinct concepts, even when it finds
them embodied in a single individual? Because, reflecting on the manner in
which reality presents itself, through sense experience, as actually
existing, it finds resemblances and differences between individually
distinct data. It finds in some of them grades of reality which it does
not find in others, individual, specific, and generic grades; and
some—transcendental—grades common to all. Now between these various grades
of being as found in one and the same individual it cannot be denied that
there exists a logical distinction with a foundation or ground for it in
the individual reality; because the latter, _being more or less similar_
to other individual realities, causes the mind to apprehend it by a number
of distinct concepts: the individuality whereby it differs really from all
other individuals of the same species; the specific, differential and
generic grades of being whereby it is conceptually identified with wider
and wider classes of things; and the transcendental grades whereby it is
conceptually identified with all others. The _similarity_ of really
distinct individuals, which is the _conceptual identity_ of their
_qualities_, is the ground on which we conceptually identify their
_essences_. Now is there any reason for thinking that these grounds of
similarity, as found in the individual, are _really distinct_ from one
another in the latter? They are certainly conceptually distinct
expressions—each less inadequate than the wider ones—of what is really one
individual essence. But we must take them to be all really identical in
and with this individual essence, unless we are prepared to hold
conceptual plurality as such to be real plurality; in which case we should
also hold conceptual unity as such to be real unity. But this latter view
is precisely the error of extreme realism, of reifying abstract concepts
and holding the “_universale a parte rei_”: a theory which leads logically
to monism.( )

 . INDIVIDUALITY.—The distinction, therefore, between these grades of
being in the individual, is a virtual distinction, _i.e._ a logical
distinction with a ground for it in the reality. This is the sort of
distinction which exists between the specific nature of the individual,
_i.e._ what is contained in the definition of the lowest class to which it
belongs, and its _individuality_, _i.e._ what constitutes its _nature or
essence as an individual_. No doubt the concrete existing individual
contains, besides its individual nature or essence, a variety of
accidental characteristics which serve as marks or signs whereby its
individuality _is revealed to us_. These are called “individualizing
characteristics,” “_notae individuantes_,” the familiar scholastic list of
them being “_forma_, _figura_, _locus_, _tempus_, _stirps_, _patria_,
_nomen_,” with manifest reference to the individual “man”. But though
these characteristics enable us to mark off the individual in space and
time from other individuals of the same class, thus _revealing_
individuality to us in the concrete, it cannot be held that they
constitute the individuality of the nature or substance in each case. If
the human substance, essence, or nature, as found in Socrates, were held
to differ from the human substance, essence, or nature, as found in Plato,
only by the fact that in each it is affected by a different set of
accidents, _i.e._ of modes accidental to the substance as found in each,
then it would follow that this substance is not merely _conceptually_
identical in both, but that it is _really_ identical in both; which is the
error of extreme realism. As a matter of fact it is the converse that is
true: the sets of accidents are distinct because they affect individual
substances already really and individually distinct.

It is manifest that the accidents which are _separable_ from the
individual substance, _e.g._ name, shape, size, appearance, location,
etc., cannot constitute its individuality. There are, however, other
characteristics which are _inseparable_ from the individual substance, or
which are _properties_ of the latter, _e.g._ the fact that an individual
man was born of certain parents. Perhaps it is such characteristics that
give its individuality to the individual substance?( ) To think so would
be to misunderstand the question under discussion. We are not now
inquiring into the _extrinsic_ causes whereby actually existing reality is
individuated, into the _efficient_ principles of its individuation, but
into the _formal_ and _intrinsic_ principle of the latter. There must
obviously be something intrinsic to the individual reality itself whereby
it is individuated. And it is about this intrinsic something we are
inquiring. The individual man is this individual, human nature is thus
individuated in him, by something that is essential to human nature as
found in him. This something has been called—after the analogy of the
_differentia specifica_ which differentiates species within a genus—the
_differentia individua_ of the individual. It has also been called by some
the _differentia numerica_, and by Scotists the _haecceitas_. However we
are to conceive this something, it is certain at all events that,
considered as it is really found in the individual, it cannot be anything
_really distinct_ from the specific nature of the latter. No doubt, the
_differentia specifica_, considered in the abstract, it is not essential
and intrinsic to the _natura generica_ considered in the abstract: it is
extrinsic and accidental to the abstract content of the latter notion; but
this is because we are conceiving these grades of being in the abstract.
The same is true of the _differentia individua_ as compared with the
_natura specifica_ in the abstract. But we are now considering these
grades of reality as they are actually in the concrete individual being:
and as they are found here, we have seen that a real distinction between
them is inadmissible.

 . THE “PRINCIPLE OF INDIVIDUATION”.—How, then, are we to conceive this
something which individuates reality? It may be well to point out that for
the erroneous doctrine of extreme realism, which issues in monism, the
problem of individuation, as here understood, does not arise. For the
monist all plurality in being is merely apparent, not real: there can be
no question of a real distinction between individual and individual.( )
Similarly, the nominalist and the conceptualist evade the problem. For
these the individual alone is not merely formally real: it alone is
fundamentally real: the universal is not even fundamentally real, has no
foundation in reality, and thus all scientific knowledge of reality as
revealed in sense experience is rendered impossible. But for the moderate
realist, while the individual alone is formally real, the universal is
fundamentally real, and hence the problem arises. It may be forcibly
stated in the form of a paradox: That whereby Socrates and Plato are
really distinct from each other as individuals is really identical with
the human nature which is really in both. But what individuates human
nature in Socrates, or in Plato, is logically distinct from the human
nature that is really in Socrates, and really in Plato. We have only to
inquire, therefore, whether the intrinsic principle of individuation is to
be conceived merely as a negation, as something negative added by the mind
to the concept of the specific nature, whereby the latter is apprehended
as incapable of multiplication into “others” each of which would be
formally that same nature, or, in other words, as incommunicable; or is
the intrinsic ground of this incommunicability to be conceived as
something positive, not indeed as something really distinct from, and
superadded to, the specific nature, but as a positive aspect of the
latter, an aspect, moreover, not involved in the concept of the specific
nature considered in the abstract.

Of the many views that have been put forward on this question two or three
call for some attention. In the opinion of Thomists generally, the
principle which individuates _material_ things, thus multiplying
numerically the same specific nature, is to be conceived as a positive
mode affecting the latter and revealing it in a new aspect, whereas the
specific nature of the _spiritual_ individual is itself formally an
individual. The principle of the latter’s individuation is already
involved in the very concept of its specific nature, and therefore is not
to be conceived as a distinct positive aspect of the latter but simply as
the absence of plurality and communicability in the latter. In material
things, moreover, the positive mode or aspect whereby the specific nature
is found numerically multiplied, and incommunicable as it exists in each,
consists in the fact that such a specific nature involves in its very
constitution a _material_ principle which is actually allied with certain
_quantitative dimensions_. Hence the principle which individuates material
substances is not to be conceived—after the manner in which Scotists
conceive it—as an ultimate _differentia_ affecting the _formal_ factor of
the nature, determining the specific nature just as the _differentia
specifica_ determines the generic nature, but as a _material_
differentiating principle. What individuates the material individual, what
marks it off as one in itself, distinct or divided from other individuals
of the same specific nature, and incommunicable in that condition, is the
material factor of that individual’s nature—not, indeed, the material
factor, _materia prima_, considered in the abstract, but the material
factor as proximately capable of actual existence by being allied to
certain more or less definite spatial or quantitative dimensions: “matter
affected with quantity”: “_materia quantitate signata_”.( )

In regard to material substances this doctrine embraces two separate
contentions: (_a_) that the principle which individuates such a substance
must be conceived as something positive, not really distinct from, but yet
not contained in, the specific nature considered in the abstract; (_b_)
that this positive aspect is to be found not in the formal but in the
material principle of the composite corporeal substance.

To the former contention it might be objected that what individuates the
specific nature cannot be conceived as anything _positive_, superadded to
this nature: it cannot be anything _accidental_ to the latter, for if it
were, the individual would be only an accidental unity, a “_unum per
accidens_” and would be constituted by an accident, which we have seen to
be inadmissible; nor, on the other hand, can it be anything _essential_ to
the specific nature, for if it were, then individuals should be capable of
adequate essential definition, and furthermore the definition of the
specific nature would not really give the whole essence or _quidditas_ of
the individuals—two consequences which are commonly rejected by all
scholastics. To this, however, it is replied that the principle of
individuation is something essential to the specific nature in the sense
that it _is_ something intrinsic to, and really identical with, the whole
real substance or entity of this nature, though not involved in the
abstract concept by the analysis of which we reach the definition or
_quidditas_ of this nature. What individuates Socrates is certainly
essential to Socrates, and is therefore really identical with his human
nature; it is intrinsic to the human nature in him, a mode or aspect of
his human substance; yet it does not enter into the definition of his
nature—“_animal rationale_”—for such definition abstracts from
individuality. When, therefore, we say that definition of the specific
nature gives the whole _essence_ of an individual, we mean that it gives
explicitly the abstract (specific) essence, not the individuality which is
really identical with this, nor, therefore, the whole substantial reality
of the individual. We give different answers to the questions, “What is
Socrates?” and “Who is Socrates?” The answer to the former question—a
“man,” or a “rational animal”—gives the “essence,” but not explicitly the
whole substantial reality of the individual, this remaining incapable of
adequate conceptual analysis. The latter question we answer by giving the
notes that _reveal_ individuality. These, of course, are “accidental” in
the strict sense. But even the principles which constitute the
individuality of separate individuals of the same species, and which
differentiate these individuals numerically from one another, we do not
describe as _essential_ differences, whereas we do describe specific and
generic differences as _essential_. The reason of this is that the latter
are abstract, universal, conceptual, amenable to intellectual analysis,
scientifically important, while the former are just the reverse; the
universal differences alone are principles about which we can have
scientific knowledge, for “all science is of the abstract and
universal”;( ) and this is what we have in mind when we describe them as
“essential” or “formal,” and individual differences as “entitative” or
“material”.

The second point in the Thomistic doctrine is that corporeal substances
are individuated by reason of their _materiality_. The formative,
specific, determining principle of the corporeal substance is rendered
_incommunicable_ by its union with the material, determinable principle;
and it becomes individually _distinct_ or separate by the fact that this
latter principle, in order to be capable of union with the given specific
form, has in its very essence an exigence for certain more or less
determinate dimensions in space. Corporeal things have their natural size
within certain limits. The individual of a given corporeal species can
exist only because the material principle, receptive of this specific
form, has a natural relation to the fundamental property of corporeal
things, _viz._ quantity, within certain more or less determinate limits.
The form is rendered incommunicable by its reception in the matter. This
concrete realization of the form in the matter is individually distinct
and separate from other realizations of the same specific form, by the
fact that the matter of this realization demands certain dimensions of
quantity: this latter property being the root-principle of numerical
multiplication of corporeal individuals within the same species.

On the other hand, incorporeal substances such as angels or pure spirits,
being “pure” forms, “_formæ subsistentes_,” wholly and essentially
unallied with any determinable material principle, are _of themselves_ not
only specific but individual; they are themselves essentially
incommunicable, superior to all multiplication or repeated realization of
themselves: they are such that each can be actualized only “once and for
all”: each is a species in itself: it is the full, exhaustive, and
adequate expression of a divine type, of an exemplar in the Divine Mind:
its realization is not, like that of a material form, the actuation of an
indefinitely determinable material principle: it sums up and exhausts the
imitable perfection of the specific type in its single individuality,
whereas the perfection of the specific type of a corporeal thing cannot be
adequately expressed in any single individual realization, but only by
repeated realizations; nor indeed can it ever be adequately, exhaustively
expressed, by any finite multitude of these.

It follows that in regard to pure spirits the individuating principle and
the specific principle are not only really but also logically,
conceptually identical; that the distinction between individual and
individual is here properly a specific distinction; that it can be
described as numerical only in an analogical sense, if by numerical we
mean material or quantitative, _i.e._ the distinction between corporeal
individuals of the same species ( ).

But the distinction between individual human souls is not a specific or
formal distinction. These, though spiritual, are not _pure_ spirits. They
are spiritual substances which, of their very nature, are essentially
ordained for union with matter. They all belong to the same species—the
human species. But they do not constitute individuals of this species
unless as existing actually united with matter. Each human soul has a
transcendental relation to its own body, to the “_materia signata_” for
which, and in which, it was created. For each human soul this relation is
unique. Just as it is the material principle of each human being, the
matter as allied to quantitative dimensions, that individuates the man, so
it is the unique relation of his soul to the material principle thus
spatially determined, that individuates his soul. Now the soul, even when
disembodied and existing after death, necessarily retains in its very
constitution this essential relation to its own body; and thus it is that
disembodied souls, though not actually allied with matter, remain
numerically distinct and individuated in virtue of their essential
relation, each to its own body. We see, therefore, that human souls,
though spiritual, are an entirely different order of beings, and must be
conceived quite differently, from pure spirits.


    We must be content with this brief exposition of the Thomistic
    doctrine on individuation. A discussion of the arguments for and
    against it would carry us too far.( ) There is no doubt that
    what _reveals_ the individuality of the corporeal substance to us
    is its material principle, in virtue of which its existence is
    circumscribed within certain limits of time and space and affected
    with individual characteristics, “_notae individuantes_”. But the
    Thomistic doctrine, which finds in “_materia signata_” the formal,
    intrinsic, constitutive principle of individuation, goes much
    deeper. It is intimately connected with the Aristotelian theory of
    knowledge and reality. According to this philosophy the formative
    principle or ἔιδος, the _forma subtantialis_, is our sole key to
    the intelligibility of corporeal things: these are intelligible in
    so far forth as they are actual, and they are actual in virtue of
    their “forms”. Hence the tendency of the scholastic commentators
    of Aristotle to use the term “form” as synonymous with the term
    “nature,” though the whole nature of the corporeal substance
    embraces the material as well as the formal principle: for even
    though it does, we can understand nothing about this “nature”
    beyond what is intelligible in it in virtue of its “form.” The
    material principle, on the other hand, is the potential,
    indeterminate principle, in itself unintelligible. We know that in
    ancient Greek philosophy it was regarded as the ἄλογον, the surd
    and contingent principle in things, the element which resisted
    rational analysis and fell outside the scope of “science,” or
    “knowledge of the necessary and universal”. While it revealed the
    forms or natures of things to sense, it remained itself impervious
    to intellect, which grasped these natures and rendered them
    intelligible only by divesting them of matter, by abstracting them
    from matter. Reality is intelligible only in so far forth as it is
    immaterial, either in fact or by abstraction. The human intellect,
    being itself spiritual, is “receptive of forms without matter”.
    But being itself allied with matter, its proper object is none
    other than the natures or essences of corporeal things,
    abstracted, however, from the matter in which they are actually
    “immersed”. The only reason, therefore, why any intelligible form
    or essence which, as abstract and universal, is “one” for
    intellect, is nevertheless actually or potentially “manifold” in
    its reality, is because it is allied with a material principle. It
    is the latter that accounts for the numerical multiplication, in
    actual reality, of any intelligible form or essence. If the latter
    is material it can be actualized only by indefinitely repeated,
    numerically or materially distinct, alliances with matter. It
    cannot be actualized “_tota simul_,” or “once for all,” as it
    were. It is, therefore, the material principle that not merely
    reveals, but also constitutes, the individuation of such corporeal
    forms or essences. Hence, too, the individual as such cannot be
    adequately apprehended by intellect; for all intelligible
    principles of reality are formal, whereas the individuating
    principle is material.

    On the other hand, if an intelligible essence or form be purely
    spiritual, wholly unrelated to any indeterminate, material
    principle, it must be “one” not alone conceptually or logically
    but also really: it can exist only as “one”: it is of itself
    individual: it can be differentiated from other spiritual essences
    not materially but only formally, or, in other words, not
    numerically but by a distinction which is at once individual and
    specific. Two pure spirits cannot be “two” numerically and “one”
    specifically, two for sense and one for intellect, as two men are:
    if they are distinct at all they must be distinct for intellect,
    _i.e._ they cannot be properly conceived as two members of the
    same species.

    In this solution of the question it is not easy to see how the
    material principle, which, by its alliance with quantity,
    individuates the form, is itself individuated so as to be the
    source and principle of a multiplicity of numerically distinct and
    incommunicable realizations of this form. Perhaps the most that
    can be said on this point is that we must conceive quantity, which
    is the fundamental property of corporeal reality, as being itself
    essentially divisible, and the material principle as deriving from
    its essential relation to quantity its function of multiplying the
    same specific nature numerically.


Of those who reject the Thomistic doctrine some few contend that it is the
_actual existence_ of any specific nature that should be conceived as
individuating the latter. No doubt the universal as such cannot exist;
reality in order to exist actually must be individual. Yet it cannot be
actual existence that individuates it. We must conceive it as individual
before conceiving it as actually existent; and we can conceive it as
individual while abstracting from its existence. We can think, for
instance, of purely possible individual men, or angels, as numerically or
individually distinct from one another. Moreover, what individuates the
nature must be essential to the latter, but actual existence is not
essential to any finite nature. Hence actual existence cannot be the
principle of individuation.( ) Can it be contended that _possible_
existence is what individuates reality? No; for possible existence is
nothing more than intrinsic capacity to exist actually, and this is
essential to all reality: it is the criterion whereby we distinguish real
being from logical being; but real being, as such, is indifferent to
universality or individuality; as far as the simple concept of real being
is concerned the latter may be either universal or individual; the concept
abstracts equally from either condition of being.

The vast majority, therefore, of those who reject the Thomistic doctrine
on individuation, support the view that what individuates any nature or
substance is simply the whole reality, the total entity, of the
individual. This total entity of the individual, though really identical
with the specific nature, must be conceived as something positive,
superadded to the latter, for it involves a something which is logically
or mentally distinct from the latter. This something is what we conceive
as a _differentia individua_, after the analogy of the _differentia
specifica_ which contracts the concept of the genus to that of the
species; and by Scotists it has been termed “_haecceitas_” or “thisness”.
Without using the Scotist terminology, most of those scholastics who
reject the Thomist doctrine on this point advocate the present view. The
individuality or “thisness” of the individual substance is regarded as
having no special principle in the individual, other than the whole
substantial entity of the latter. If the nature is simple it is of itself
individual; if composite, the intrinsic principles from which it
results—_i.e._ matter and form essentially united—suffice to individuate
it.

In this view, therefore, the material principle of any individual man, for
example, is numerically and individually distinct from that of any other
individual, _of itself_ and independently of its relation either to the
formative principle or to quantity. The formative principle, too, is
individuated _of itself_, and not by the material principle which is
really distinct from it, or by its relation to this material principle.
Likewise the union of both principles, which is a substantial mode of the
composite substance, is individuated and rendered numerically distinct
from all other unions of these two individual principles, not by either or
both these, but by itself. And finally, the individual composite substance
has its individuation from these two intrinsic principles thus
individually united.


    It may be doubted, perhaps, whether this attempt at explaining the
    real, individual “manifoldness” of what is “one” for intellect,
    _i.e._ the universal, throws any real light upon the problem. No
    doubt, every element or factor which is grasped by intellect in
    its analysis of reality—matter, form, substance, accident,
    quantity, nay, even “individuality” itself—is apprehended as
    abstract and universal; and if we hold the doctrine of Moderate
    Realism, that the intellect in apprehending the universal attains
    to reality, and not merely to a logical figment of its own
    creation, the problem of relating intelligibly the reality which
    is “one” for intellect with the same reality as manifestly
    “manifold” in its concrete realizations for sense, is a genuine
    philosophical problem. To say that what individuates any real
    essence or nature, what deprives it of the “oneness” and
    “universality” which it has for intellect, what makes it “this,”
    “that,” or “the other” incommunicable individual, must be
    conceived to be simply the whole essential reality of that nature
    itself—leaves us still in ignorance as to why such a nature, which
    is really “one” for intellect, can be really “manifold” in its
    actualizations for sense experience. The reason why the nature
    which is one and universal for abstract thought, and which is
    undoubtedly not a logical entity but a reality capable of actual
    existence, can be actualized as a manifold of distinct
    individuals, must be sought, we are inclined to think, in the
    relation of this nature to a material principle in alliance with
    quantity which is the source of all purely numerical, “space and
    time” distinctions.


 . INDIVIDUATION OF ACCIDENTS.—The rôle of quantity in the Thomistic
theory of individuation suggests the question: How are accidents
themselves individuated? We have referred already ( , _n._) to the view
that they are individuated by the individual subjects or substances in
which they inhere. If we distinguish again between what _reveals_
individuality and what _constitutes it_, there can be no doubt that when
accidents of the same kind are found in individually distinct subjects
what reveals the numerical distinction between the former is the fact that
they are found inhering in the latter. So, also, distinction of individual
substances is the _extrinsic_, _genetic_, or _causal_ principle of the
numerical distinction between similar accidents arising in these
substances. But when the same kind of accident recurs successively in the
same individual substance—as, for example, when a man performs repeated
acts of the same kind—what reveals the numerical or individual distinction
between these latter cannot be the individual substance, for it is one and
the same, but rather the _time_ distinction between the accidents
themselves.

The intrinsic constitutive principle which formally individuates the
accidents of individually distinct substances is, according to Thomists
generally, their essential relation to the individual substances in which
they appear. It is not clear how this theory can be applied to the
fundamental accident of corporeal substances. If the function of formally
individuating the corporeal substance itself is to be ascribed in any
measure to _quantity_, it would seem to follow that this latter must be
regarded as individuated by itself, by its own total entity or reality.
And this is the view held by most other scholastics in regard to the
individuation of accidents generally: that these, like substances, are
individuated by their own total positive reality.

When there is question of the same kind of accident recurring in the same
individual subject, the “time” distinction between such successive
individual accidents of the same kind would appear not merely to _reveal_
their individuality but also to indicate a different relation of each to
its subject as existing at that particular point of space and time: so
that the relation of the accident to its individual subject, as here and
now existing in the concrete, would be the individuating principle of the
accident.

Whether a number of accidents of the same _species infima_, and distinct
merely numerically, could exist simultaneously in the same individual
subject, is a question on which scholastic philosophers are not agreed:
the negative opinion, which has the authority of St. Thomas, being the
more probable. Those various questions on the individuation of accidents
will be better understood from a subsequent exposition of the scholastic
doctrine on accidents (Ch. viii.).


    It may be well to remark that in inquiring about the individuation
    of substances and accidents we have been considering reality from
    a static standpoint, seeking how we are to conceive and interpret
    intellectually, or for abstract thought, the relation of the
    universal to the individual. If, however, we ascribe to “time”
    distinctions any function in individuating accidents of the same
    kind in the same individual substance, we are introducing into our
    analysis the kinetic aspect of reality, or its subjection to
    processes of change.

    We may call attention here to a few other questions of minor
    import discussed by scholastics. First, have all individuals of
    the same species the same _substantial_ perfection, or can
    individuals have different grades of substantial perfection within
    the same species? All admit the obvious fact that individual
    differs from individual within the same species in the number,
    variety, extent and intensity of their accidental properties and
    qualities. But, having the human soul mainly in view, they
    disagree as to whether the substantial perfection of the specific
    nature can be actualized in different grades in different
    individuals. According to the more common opinion there cannot be
    different _substantial_ grades of the same specific nature, for
    the simple reason that every such grade of substantial perfection
    should be regarded as specific, as changing the species: hence,
    _e.g._ all human souls are substantially equal in perfection. This
    view is obviously based upon the conception of specific types or
    essences as being, after the analogy of numbers, immutable when
    considered in the abstract. And it seems to be confirmed by the
    consideration that the intrinsic principle of individuation is
    nothing, or adds nothing, _really distinct_ from the specific
    essence itself.

    Another question in connexion with individuation has derived at
    least an historical interest from the notable controversy to which
    it gave rise in the seventeenth century between Clarke and
    Leibniz. The latter, in accordance with the principles of his
    system of philosophy,—the _Law of Sufficient Reason_ and the _Law
    of Continuity_ among the _monads_ or ultimate principles of
    being,—contended that two individual beings so absolutely alike as
    to be _indiscernible_ would be _eo ipso identical_, in other
    words, that the reality of two such beings is impossible.

    Of course if we try to conceive two individuals so absolutely
    alike both in essence and accidents, both in the abstract and in
    the concrete, as to be indiscernible either by our senses or by
    our intellect, or by any intellect—even the Divine Intellect—we
    are simply conceiving _the same thing_ twice over. But is there
    anything impossible or contradictory in thinking that God could
    create two perfectly similar beings, distinct from each other only
    individually, so similar, however, that neither human sense nor
    human intellect could apprehend them as two, but only as one? The
    impossibility is not apparent. Were they two material individuals
    they should, of course, occupy the same space in order to have
    similar spatial relations, but impenetrability is not essential to
    corporeal substances. And even in the view that each is
    individuated by its “_materia signata_” it is not impossible to
    conceive numerically distinct quantified matters allied at the
    same time to the same dimensions of space. If, on the other hand,
    there be question of two pure spirits, absolutely similar
    specifically, even in the Thomistic view that here the individual
    distinction is at the same time specific there seems to be no
    sufficient ground for denying that the Divine Omnipotence could
    create two or more such individually (and therefore specifically)
    distinct spirits:( ) such distinction remaining, of course,
    indiscernible for the finite human intellect.

    The argument of Leibniz, that there would be _no sufficient
    reason_ for the creation of two such indiscernible beings, and
    that it would therefore be repugnant to the Divine Wisdom, is
    extrinsic to the question of their intrinsic possibility: if they
    be intrinsically possible they cannot be repugnant to any
    attribute of the Divinity, either to the Divine Omnipotence or to
    the Divine Wisdom.


 . IDENTITY.—Considering the order in which we acquire our ideas we are
easily convinced that the notion of finite being is antecedent to that of
infinite being. Moreover, it is from reflection on finite beings that we
arrive at the most abstract notion of being in general. We make the object
of this latter notion definite only by dividing it off mentally from
nothingness, conceived _per modum entis_, or as an _ens rationis_. Thus
the natural way of making our concepts definite is by _limiting_ them; it
is only when we come to reflect on the necessary implications of our
concept of “infinite being” that we realize the possibility of conceiving
a being which is _definite_ without being really _limited_, which is
definite by the very fact of its infinity, by its possession of unlimited
perfection; and even then our imperfect human mode of conceiving “infinite
being” is helped by distinguishing or dividing it off from all finite
being and contrasting it with the latter. All this goes to prove the truth
of the teaching of St. Thomas, that the mental function of _dividing_ or
_distinguishing_ precedes our concepts of unity and multitude. Now the
concepts of _identity_ and _distinction_ are closely allied with those of
unity and multitude; but they add something to these latter. When we think
of a being as one we must analyse it further, look at it under different
aspects, and _compare it with itself_, before we can regard it as _the
same_ or _identical_ with itself. Or, at least, we must think of it twice
and compare it with itself in the affirmative judgment “This is itself,”
“A is A,” thus formulating the logical _Principle of Identity_, in order
to come into possession of the concept of _identity_.( ) Every
affirmative categorical judgment asserts _identity_ of the predicate with
the subject (“_S is P_”): asserts, in other words, that what we apprehend
under the notion of the predicate (_P_) is _really identical_ with what we
have apprehended under the _distinct_ notion of the subject (_S_). The
synthetic function of the affirmative categorical judgment _identifies_ in
the real order what the analytic function of mental abstraction had
_separated_ in the logical order. By saying that the affirmative
categorical judgment asserts identity we mean that by asserting that “this
is that,” “man is rational” we identify “this” with “that,” “man” with
“rational,” thus _denying_ that they are _two_, that they are _distinct_,
that they _differ_. Identity is one of those elementary concepts which
cannot be defined; but perhaps we may describe it as _the logical relation
through which the mind asserts the objects of two or more of its thoughts
to be really one_.

If the object formally represented by each of the concepts is one and the
same—as, _e.g._ when we compare “_A_” with “_A_,” or “man” with “rational
animal,” or, in general, any object with its definition—the identity is
both _real and logical_ (or _conceptual_, _formal_). If the concepts
differ in their formal objects while representing _one and the same
reality_—as when we compare “St. Peter” with “head of the apostles,” or
“man” with “rational”—the identity is _real, but not logical_ or formal.
Finally, if we represent two or more realities, “John, James, Thomas,” by
the same formal concept, “man,” the identity is _merely logical_ or
formal, _not real_. Of these three kinds of identity the first is
sometimes called _adequate_, the second and third _inadequate_.

Logical identity may be _specific_ or _generic_, according as we identify
really distinct individuals under one specific concept, or really distinct
species or classes under one generic concept. Again, it may be _essential_
or _accidental_, according as the abstract and universal class-concept
under which really distinct members are classified represents a common
part of the essence of these members or only a common property or
accident. Thus John, James and Thomas are essentially identical in their
_human nature_; they are accidentally identical in being all three
_fair-haired_ and _six feet in height_. Logical identity under the concept
of _quality_ is based on the real relation of _similarity_; logical
identity under the concept of _quantity_ is based on the real relation of
_equality_. When we say that _essential_ (logical) _identity_ (_e.g._ the
identity of John, James and Thomas under the concept of “man”) is based on
the fact that the really distinct individuals have really _similar_
natures, we merely mean that _our_ knowledge of natures or essences is
derived from our knowledge of qualities, taking “qualities” in the wide
sense of “accidents” generally: that the properties and activities of
things are our only key to the nature of these things: _Operari sequitur
esse._ It is not implied, nor is it true, that real _similarity_ is a
partial _real identity_: it is but the ground of a partial _logical_
identity,—identity under the common concept of some quality (in the wide
sense of this term). For example, the height of John is as really distinct
from that of James as the humanity of John is from that of James. If,
then, individual things are _really_ distinct, how is it that we can
represent (even inadequately) _a multitude_ of them by _one_ concept? To
say that we can do so because they reveal themselves to us as _similar_ to
one another is to say what is undoubtedly true; but this does not solve
the problem of the relation between the universal and the individual in
human experience: rather it places us face to face with this problem.

Reverting now to _real_ identity: whatever we can predicate affirmatively
about a being considered as _one_, and as subject of a judgment, we regard
as really identical with that being. We cannot predicate a real part of
its real whole, or _vice versa_. But our concepts, when compared together
in judgment, bear _logical_ relations of extension and intension to each
other, that is, relations of logical part to logical whole. Thus, the
_logical_ identity of subject and predicate in the affirmative judgment
may be only _inadequate_.( ) But the real identity underlying the
affirmative judgment is an adequate real identity. When we say, for
example, that “Socrates is wise,” we mean that the object of our concept
of “wisdom” is in this case really and adequately identical with the
object of our concept of “Socrates”: in other words that we are conceiving
one and the same real being under two distinct concepts, each of which
represents, more or less adequately, the whole real being, and one of them
in this case less adequately than the other.

We have to bear in mind that while considering being as one or manifold,
identical or distinct, we are thinking of it in its _static_ mode, as an
object of abstract thought, not in its _dynamic and kinetic_ mode as
actually existing in space and time, and subject to change. It is the
identity of being with itself when considered in this static, unchanging
condition, that is embodied in the logical _Principle of Identity_. In
order, therefore, that this principle may find its application to being or
reality _as subject to actual change_—and this is the state in which _de
facto_ reality is presented to us as an immediate datum of experience—we
must seize upon the changing reality and think of it in an indivisible
instant apart from the change to which it is actually subject; only thus
does the Principle of Identity apply to it—as _being_, not as _becoming_,
not _in fieri_, but _in facto esse_. The Principle of Identity, which
applies to all real being, whether possible or actual, tells us simply
that “a thing is what it is”. But for the understanding of actual being as
subject to real change we must supplement the Principle of Identity by
another principle which tells us that such an actual being not only is
actually what it is (Principle of Identity), but also that it _is
potentially something other than what it actually is, that it is
potentially what it can become actually_ (Ch. ii.).

We have seen that, since change is not continuous annihilation and
creation, the changing being must in some real and true sense _persist_
throughout the process of change. It is from experience of change we
derive our notion of time-duration; and the concept of permanence or
stability throughout change gives us the notion of a real sameness or
abiding self-identity which is compatible with real change. But a being
which persists in existence is identical with itself throughout its
duration only in so far forth as it has not changed. Only the Necessary
Being, whose duration is absolutely exempt from all change, is
_absolutely_ or _metaphysically_ identical with Himself: His duration is
eternity—which is one perpetual, unchanging _now_. A being which persists
unchanged in its essence or nature, which is exempt from substantial
change, but which is subject to accidental change, to a succession of
accidental qualities such as vital actions—such a being is said to retain
its _physical_ identity with itself throughout those changes. Such, for
instance, is the identity of the human soul with itself, or of any
individual living thing during its life, or even of an inorganic material
substance as long as it escapes substantial change. Finally, the
persisting identity of a collection of beings, united by some moral bond
so as to form a moral unit, is spoken of as _moral_ identity as long as
the bond remains, even though the constituent members may be constantly
disappearing to be replaced by others: as in a nation, a religious
society, a legal corporation, etc.

 . DISTINCTION.—Distinction is the correlative of identity; it is the
absence or negation of the latter. We express the relation called
distinction by the negative judgment, “this is not that”; it is the
relation of a being to whatever is not itself, the relation of _one_ to
_other_.

Distinction may be either _adequate_ or _inadequate_, according as we
distinguish one total object of thought from another total object, or only
from a part of itself. For example, the distinction between John and James
is an adequate real distinction, while that between John and his body is
an inadequate real distinction; the distinction between John’s rationality
and his animality is an adequate logical distinction, while the
distinction between either of these and his humanity is an inadequate
logical distinction.

We have already ( ) briefly explained and illustrated the most important
classification of distinctions: that into real and logical; the
sub-division of the latter into purely logical and virtual; and of the
latter again into perfect (complete, adequate) and imperfect (incomplete,
inadequate). But the theory there briefly outlined calls for some further
analysis and amplification.

 . LOGICAL DISTINCTIONS AND THEIR GROUNDS.—The purely logical distinction
must not be confounded with a mere _verbal_ distinction, _e.g._ that
between an “edifice” and a “building,” or between “truthfulness” and
“veracity”. A logical distinction is a distinction _in the concepts_:
these must represent one and the same reality but in different ways: the
one may be more explicit, more fully analysed than the other, as a
definition is in comparison with the thought-object defined; or the one
may represent the object less adequately than the other, as when we
compare (in intension) the concepts “man” and “animal”; or the one may be
predicated of the other in an affirmative judgment; or the one may
represent the object as concrete and individual, the other the same object
as abstract and universal.( )

Comparing, in the next place, the purely logical with the virtual
distinction, we see that the grounds for making these distinctions are
different. Every distinction made by the mind must have an intelligible
ground or reason of some sort—a _fundamentum distinctionis_. Now in the
case of the purely logical distinction the ground is understood to consist
exclusively in the needs of the mind itself—needs which spring from the
mind’s own limitations when confronted with the task of understanding or
interpreting reality, of making reality intelligible. Purely logical
distinctions are therefore seen to be a class of purely logical relations,
_i.e._ of those _entia rationis_ which the mind must construct for itself
in its effort to understand the real. They have no other reality as
objects of thought than the reality they derive from the constitutive or
constructive activity of the mind. They are modes, or forms, or terms, of
the cognitive activity itself, not of the reality which is the object
apprehended and contemplated by means of this cognitive activity.

The virtual distinction, on the other hand, although it also, as an object
of thought, is only an _ens rationis_—inasmuch as there is no real duality
or plurality corresponding to it in the reality into which the mind
introduces it, this reality being a real _unity_—the virtual distinction
is considered, nevertheless, to have a ground, or reason, or foundation
(for making and introducing it) in the nature of this one reality; that
is, it is regarded as having a _real_ foundation, a _fundamentum in re_.
In so far, therefore, as our knowledge is permeated by virtual
distinctions, reality cannot be said to be _formally_, but only
_fundamentally_ what this knowledge represents it to be. Does this fact
interfere with the objective validity of our knowledge? Not in the least;
for we do not ascribe to the reality the distinctions, and other such
modes or forms, which we know by reflection to be formally characteristic
_not of things_ but _of our thought or cognition of things_. Our
knowledge, therefore, so far as it goes, may be a faithful apprehension of
reality, even though it be itself affected by modes not found in the
reality.

But what is this _real_ foundation of the virtual distinction? What _is_
the _fundamentum in re_? It is not a real or objective duality in virtue
of which we could say that there are, in the object of our thought, two
beings or realities one of which is not the other. Such duality would
cause a _real_ distinction. But just here the difficulties of our analysis
begin to arise: for we have to fix our attention on actually existing
realities; and, assuming that each and every one of these is an
individual, we have to bear in mind the relation of the real to the
actual, of reality as abstract and universal to reality as concrete and
individual, of the simple to the composite, of the stable to the changing,
of essential to accidental unity—in any and every attempt to discriminate
in detail between a real and a virtual distinction. Nor is it easy to lay
down any general test which will serve even theoretically to discriminate
between them. Let us see what grounds have been mainly suggested as real
foundations for the virtual distinction.

If a being which is not only one but simple, manifests, in the superior
grade of being to which it belongs, a perfection which is equivalent to
many lesser perfections found really distinct and separate elsewhere, in
separate beings of an inferior order, this is considered a sufficient real
ground for considering the former being, though really one and simple, as
virtually manifold.( ) The human soul, as being virtually
threefold—rational, sentient and vegetative—is a case in point: but only
on the assumption that the soul of the individual man can be proved to be
one and simple. This, of course, all scholastics regard as capable of
proof: even those of them who hold that the powers or faculties whereby it
immediately manifests these three grades of perfection are _accidental_
realities, _really distinct_ from one another and from the _substance_ of
the soul itself.

Again, the being which is the object of our thought may be so rich in
reality or perfection that our finite minds cannot adequately grasp it by
any one mental intuition, but must proceed discursively, by analysis and
abstraction, taking in partial aspects of it successively through
inadequate concepts; while realizing that these aspects, these objects of
our distinct concepts, are only partial aspects of one and the same real
being. This, in fact, is our common experience. But the theory assumes
that we are able to determine when these objects of our concepts are only
mental aspects of _one_ reality, and when they are several separate
realities; nay, even, that we can determine whether or not they are really
distinct entities united together to form one _composite_ individual
being, or only mentally distinct views of one _simple_ individual being.
For example, it is assumed that while the distinction between the sentient
and the rational grades of being in a human individual can be shown to be
only a virtual distinction, that between the body and the soul of the same
individual can be shown to be a real distinction; or, again, that while
the distinction between essence, intellect, and will in God, can be shown
to be only a virtual distinction, that between essence, intellect, and
will in man, can be shown to be a real distinction.

 . THE VIRTUAL DISTINCTION AND THE REAL DISTINCTION.—Now scholastics
differ considerably in classifying this, that, or the other distinction,
as logical or as real; but this does not prove that it is impossible ever
to determine with certitude whether any particular distinction is logical
or real. What we are looking for just now is a general test for
discriminating, if such can be found. And this brings us to a
consideration of the test suggested in the very definitions themselves. At
first sight it would appear to be an impracticable, if not even an
unintelligible test: “The distinction is real if it exists in the
reality—_i.e._ if the reality is _two_ (or more) _beings_, not _one
being_—antecedently to, or independently of, the consideration of the
mind; otherwise the distinction is logical”. But—it might be objected—how
can we possibly know whether or not any object of perception or thought is
_one_ or _more than one_ antecedently to, or independently of, the
consideration of the mind? It is certainly impossible for us to know what,
or what kind, reality is, or whether it is one or manifold, apart from and
prior to, the exercise of our own cognitive activity. This, therefore,
cannot be what the test means: to interpret it in such a sense would be
absurd. But when we have perceived reality in our actual sense experience,
when we have interpreted it, got the meaning of it, made it intelligible,
and actually understood it, by the spontaneous exercise of intellect, the
judging and reasoning faculty: then, obviously, we are at liberty to
reflect critically on those antecedent spontaneous processes, on the
knowledge which is the result of them, and the reality which is known
through them; and by such critical reflection on those processes, their
objects and their products, on the “reality as perceived and known” and on
the “perceiving” and “knowing” of it, we may be able to distinguish
between two classes of contributions to the total result which is the
“known reality”: those which we must regard as purely mental, as modes or
forms or subjectively constructed terms of the mental function of
cognition itself (whether perceptual or conceptual), and those which we
must regard as given or presented to the mind as objects, which are not in
any sense constructed or contributed by the mind, which, therefore, are
what they are independently of our mental activity, and which would be and
remain what they are, and what we have apprehended them to be, even if we
had never perceived or thought of them. This, according to the
scholastics, is the sense—and it is a perfectly intelligible sense—in
which we are called on to decide whether the related terms of any given
distinction have been merely rendered distinct by the analytic activity of
the cognitive process, or are themselves distinct realities irrespective
of this process. That it is possible to carry on successfully, at least to
some extent, this work of discrimination between the subjective and the
objective factors of our cognitive experience, can scarcely be denied. It
is what philosophers in every age have been attempting. There are,
however, some distinctions about the nature of which philosophers have
never been able to agree, some holding them to be real, others to be only
virtual: the former view being indicative of the tendency to emphasize the
rôle of cognition as a passive representation of objectively given
reality; the latter view being an expression of the opposite tendency to
emphasize the active or constitutive or constructive factors whereby
cognition assimilates to the mind’s own mode of being the reality given to
it in experience. In all cognition there is an assimilation of reality and
mind, of object and subject. When certain distinctions are held to be real
this consideration is emphasized: that in the cognitive process, as such,
it is the mind that is assimilated to the objective reality.( ) When
these same distinctions are held to be logical this other consideration is
emphasized: that in the cognitive process reality must also be assimilated
to mind, must be mentalized so to speak: _Cognitum est in cognoscente
secundum modum cognoscentis_: that in this process the mind must often
regard what is _one_ reality under _distinct aspects_: and that if we
regard these distinct aspects as distinct realities we are violating the
principle, _Entia non sunt multiplicanda praeter necessitatem_.


    Now those philosophers who hold certain distinctions to be
    virtual, and not real, thereby ascribe to cognitive experience a
    larger sphere of constitutive or constructive influence than would
    be allowed to it by advocates of the reality of such distinctions.
    But by doing so are they to be regarded as calling into question
    the objective validity of human knowledge? By no means: the fact
    that the human mind can understand reality only by processes of
    abstracting, generalizing, comparing, relating, analysing and
    synthesizing—processes which involve the production of logical
    entities—in no way vitiates the value of these modes of
    understanding: it merely indicates that they are less perfect than
    intuitive modes of understanding which would dispense with such
    logical entities,—the modes characteristic of pure, angelic
    intelligences, or the knowledge of the Deity. The objective
    validity of human cognition is not interfered with either by
    enlarging or by restricting the domain of the mind’s constitutive
    activity in forming such logical entities; nor, therefore, by
    claiming that certain distinctions are real rather than virtual,
    or _vice versa_. It must be remembered, moreover, that the virtual
    distinction is not purely logical: it has a foundation in the
    reality, a “_fundamentum in re_”; and in so far as it has it gives
    us an insight into the nature of reality.

    No doubt, any particular distinction cannot be virtual and at the
    same time simply real: either view of it must be erroneous: and
    possibly both, if it happen to be _de facto_ a _purely_ logical
    distinction. But the error of confounding a virtual distinction
    with a real is not so great as that of regarding either as a
    purely logical distinction. Now the tendency of much modern
    philosophy, under the influence of Kant, has been to regard all
    the categories in which the mind apprehends reality as being
    wholly and exclusively forms of cognition, as being in the reality
    neither formally nor even fundamentally; and to infer from this an
    essential, constitutional inability of the mind to attain to a
    valid knowledge of reality. But if, as a matter of fact, these
    categories are in the reality formally, nay, even if they are in
    it only fundamentally, the inference that issues in Kantian
    subjectivism is unwarranted. And those categories we hold to be in
    the reality at least fundamentally; we therefore reject the
    Kantian phenomenism of the speculative reason. Moreover, we can
    see no valid ground for admitting the Kantian division of the
    human mind into two totally separate cognitive compartments, the
    speculative and the practical reason, and ascribing to each
    compartment cognitive principles and capacities entirely alien to
    the other. To arrive at a right theory of knowledge human
    cognitive experience as a whole must be analysed; but provided the
    analysis is really an analysis of this experience it may be
    legitimately directed towards discovering what the mental
    conditions must be—_i.e._ the conditions on the side of the
    knowing subject, the subject having the experience—which are
    _necessarily prerequisite_ for having such experience. And if it
    be found by such analysis that cognitive experience presupposes in
    the knowing subject not merely a sentient and intelligent mind,
    but a mind which perceives, imagines, remembers reality in certain
    definite ways; which thinks reality in certain modes and through
    certain forms which by its own constitutive activity it constructs
    for itself, and which it recognizes by reflection to be its own
    constructions (_e.g._ distinctions, relations, affirmations and
    negations, abstractions, generalizations, etc.: _intentiones
    logicae_, logical entities),—there is no reason whatever in all
    this for inferring that because the mind is so constituted,
    because it has these modes of cognition, it must necessarily fail
    to reach, by means of them, a true, valid, and genuine knowledge
    of reality. From the fact that human modes of cognition are human,
    and not angelic or divine; from the fact that reality can be known
    _to man_ only through these modes, these finite modes of finite
    human faculties,—we may indeed infer that even our highest
    knowledge of reality is inadequate, that it does not _comprehend_
    all that is in the reality, but surely not that it is essentially
    illusory and of its very nature incapable of giving us any true
    and valid insight into the nature of reality.


Fixing our attention on the virtual distinction we see that the mind is
supposed by means of it to apprehend, through a plurality of distinct
concepts, what it knows somehow or other to be _one_ being. Now if it
knows the reality to be _really one_, it knows that the formal object of
every distinct concept of this reality is really identical with the
objects of all the other concepts of the latter. This condition of things
is certainly verified when the mind can see that each of the distinct
concepts, though not _explicitly_ presenting the objects of the others,
nevertheless _implicitly and necessarily_ involves all these other
objects:( ) for by seeing that the distinct concepts necessarily involve
one another objectively it sees that the reality apprehended through all
of them must necessarily be _one reality_. This is what takes place in the
_imperfect_ virtual distinction: the concepts prescind from one another
formally, not objectively. But suppose that the distinct concepts prescind
from one another _objectively_, so that they cannot be seen by any
analysis to involve one another even implicitly, but present to the mind,
so far as they themselves are concerned, adequately distinct modes of
being—as happens in the _perfect_ virtual distinction, _e.g._ between
organic life, sentient life, and intellectual life (in man), or between
animality and rationality (in man),—then the all-important question
arises: How do we know, in any given case of this kind, whether or not
these adequately distinct thought-objects are _identical with one another
in the reality_? What is the test for determining whether or not, in a
given case, these objects, which are _many_ for abstract intellectual
thought, are _one being_ in the real order? The answer seems to be that
_internal and external sense experience_ can and does furnish us with
embodiments of these intellectual manifolds,—embodiments each of which we
apprehend as _a being that is really one_, as an _individual subject_ of
which they are conceptually distinct predicates.


    It would appear, therefore, that we cannot reach a true conception
    of what we are to regard as _really one_, or _really manifold_, by
    abstract thought alone. It is external and internal sense
    experience, not abstract thought, which first brings us into
    direct and immediate mental contact with _actually existing_
    reality. What we have therefore to determine is this: Does sense
    experience, or does it not, reveal reality to us as a _real
    manifold_, not as _one being_ but as _beings_ coexisting outside
    one another in space, succeeding one another in time,
    interdependent on one another, interacting on one another, and by
    this interaction causing and undergoing real change, each
    producing others, or being produced by others, really distinct
    from itself? In other words, is separateness of existence in time
    or space, as revealed in sense experience, a sufficient index of
    the real manifoldness of corporeal being, and of the really
    distinct individuality of each such being?—or are we to take it
    that because those space and time distinctions have to be
    apprehended by thought in order that not merely sense but
    intellect may apprehend corporeal beings as really manifold,
    therefore these distinctions are not _in the reality_ given to us?
    Or, again, is each person’s own conscious experience of himself as
    one being, of his own unity, and of his distinctness from other
    persons, a sufficient index that the distinction between person
    and person is a real distinction?—or are we to take it that
    because his _feeling_ of his individual unity through sense
    consciousness must be interpreted by the _thought-concepts_ of
    “one”—“individual”—“person”—“distinct” from “others,” these
    concepts do not truly express what is really given him to
    interpret? Finally, if we can infer from the actually existing
    material reality which forms the immediate datum of direct
    experience, or from the human _Ego_ as given in this experience,
    the actual existence of a real mode of being which is not material
    but spiritual, by what tests can we determine whether this
    spiritual mode of being is really one, or whether there is a real
    plurality of such beings? The solution of these questions bears
    directly on the validity of the adequate or “greater” real
    distinction, the “_distinctio realis major seu absoluta_”.

    The philosophy which defends the validity of this
    distinction,—which holds that the distinction between individual
    human beings, and between individual living things generally, is
    in the fullest and truest sense a real distinction,—is at all
    events in conformity with universally prevailing modes of thought
    and language; while the monism which repudiates these spontaneous
    interpretations of experience as invalid by denying all real
    manifoldness to reality, can make itself intelligible only by
    doing violence to thought and language alike. Not that this alone
    is a disproof of monism; but at all events it creates a
    presumption against a system to find it running counter to any of
    those universal spontaneous beliefs which appear to be rooted in
    man’s rational nature. On the other hand, the philosophy which
    accords with common belief in proclaiming a real plurality in
    being has to reconcile intellect with sense, and the universal
    with the individual, by solving the important problem of
    _individuation_: What is it that makes real being individual, if,
    notwithstanding the fact that intellect apprehends reality as
    abstract and universal, reality nevertheless can exist only as
    concrete and individual? ( - ).


 . THE REAL DISTINCTION.—In the next place it must be remembered,
comparing the virtual distinction with the real, that philosophers have
recognized two kinds of real distinction: the _major_ or _absolute_ real
distinction, and the _minor_ real, or _modal_ distinction. Before defining
these let us see what are the usual signs by which a real distinction in
general can be recognized.


    The relation of efficient causality, of efficient cause and
    effect, between two objects of thought, is sometimes set down as a
    sure sign of a (major) real distinction between them.( ) And the
    reason alleged is that a thing cannot be the efficient cause of
    itself: the efficient cause is necessarily extrinsic to the effect
    and cannot be really identical with the latter. It is to be noted
    that this test applies to reality as actually existing, as
    producing or undergoing change, and that it is derived from our
    sense experience of reality in process of change. But since our
    concept of efficient causality has its origin in our internal
    experience of our own _selves_ as active agents, as causing some
    portion of what enters into our experience, the test seems to
    assume that we have already introduced into this experience a real
    distinction between the self and what is caused by the self. It is
    not clear that the relation of efficient cause to effect, as
    applied to created causes, can precede and reveal, in our
    experience, the relation of what is _really one_ to what is
    _really other_, in this experience. If the reality revealed to us
    in our direct experience, the phenomenal universe, has been
    brought into existence by the creative act of a Supreme Being,
    this, of course, implies a real distinction between Creator and
    creature. But it does not seem possible in this case, or indeed in
    any case, to prove the existence of the causal relation
    antecedently to that of the real distinction, or to utilize the
    former as an index to the latter.


Two distinct thought-objects are regarded as _really_ distinct ( ) when
they are found to exist separately and apart from each other in time or
space, as is the case with any two individuals such as John and James, or
a man and a horse; ( ) when, although they are found in the same
individual, one of them at least is separable from the other, in the sense
that it can actually exist without that other: for example, the soul of
any individual man can exist apart from the material principle with which
it is actually united to form this living human individual; the individual
himself can exist without the particular accidental modes, such as
sitting, thinking, speaking, which actually affect his being at any
particular instant of his existence.

From this we can gather in the first place that the distinction between
two “individuals,”—individual “persons” or individual “things”—is a real
distinction in the fullest and plainest sense of this expression, a major
or absolute real distinction. It is, moreover, not merely real but actual.
Two existing “individuals” are always actually divided and separate from
each other, while each is actually one or actually undivided in itself.
And they are so “independently of the consideration of the mind”.

In the second place, assuming that the mind can apprehend, in the
individuals of its experience, a unity resulting from the union or
composition of separable factors or principles, whether essential or
accidental [  (_b_)]; and assuming that it can know these factors to be
really separable (though actually one and undivided), that is, separable
in the sense that each of any two such factors, or at least one of them,
could actually exist without the other,—it regards the distinction between
such factors as real. They are really distinct because though _actually_
one and undivided they are _potentially_ manifold. If each has a positive
entity of its own, so that absolutely speaking each could exist without
the other, the distinction is still regarded as an absolute or major real
distinction. For example, the human soul can exist without the body; the
body can exist without the soul, being actualized by the new formative
principle or principles which replace the soul at death; therefore there
is an absolute real distinction between the soul and the body of the
living human individual: although both factors form _one actual being_,
still, independently of the consideration of the mind _the one factor is
not the other_: each is really, though only potentially, other than the
factor with which it is united: the relation of “one” to “other” though
not _actually_ verified of either factor (since there is only _one actual_
being: the existing individual man), is potentially and really verified,
_i.e._ _verifiable_ of each. Again, the individual corporeal substance
can, absolutely speaking, exist without its connatural accident of
external or local extension; this latter can, absolutely speaking, exist
without its connatural substance;( ) therefore these are absolutely and
really distinct.

If only one of the factors is seen to be capable of existing without the
other, and the latter to be such that it could not actually exist except
as united with the former, so that the separability is not mutual, the
distinction is regarded still as real, but only as a _minor_ or _modal_
distinction. Such, for instance, is the distinction between a body and its
location, or its state of rest or motion: and, in general, the distinction
between a substance and what are called its accidental modes or modal
accidents. The distinction is regarded as real because reflection is held
to assure us that it is in the reality itself independently of the mind,
and not merely imposed by the mind on the reality because of some ground
or reason in the reality. It is called a modal distinction rather than an
absolute real distinction because those accidental modes of a substance do
not seem to have of themselves sufficient reality to warrant our calling
them “things” or “realities,” but rather merely “modes” or
“determinations” of things or realities. It is significant, as throwing
light on the relation of the virtual to the real distinction, that some
authors call the modal distinction not a real distinction but a
“distinctio _media_,” _i.e._ intermediate between a real and a logical
distinction; and that the question whether it should be called simply a
real distinction, or “intermediate” between a real and a logical
distinction is regarded by some as “a purely verbal question.”( ) We
shall recur to the modal distinction later ( ).

In the third place it must be noted that separability _in the sense
explained_, even non-mutual, is not regarded as the _only_ index to a real
distinction. In other words, certain distinctions are held by some to be
real even though this test of separability does not apply. For instance,
it is commonly held that not merely in man but in _all_ corporeal
individuals the formative and the determinable principle of the nature or
substance, the _forma substantialis_ and the _materia prima_, are really
distinct, although it is admitted that, apart from the case of the human
soul, _neither_ can actually exist except in union with the other. What is
held in regard to _accidental_ modes is also applied to these essential
principles of the corporeal substance: _viz._ that there is here a special
reason why such principles cannot actually exist in isolation. Of their
very nature they are held to be such that they cannot be _actualized_ or
_actually exist_ in isolation, but only in union. But this fact, it is
contended, does not prove that the principles in question are merely
mentally distinct aspects of one reality: the fact that they cannot
actually exist as such separately does not prove that they are not really
separable; and it is contended that they are really and actually separated
whenever an individual corporeal substance undergoes substantial change.


    This, then, raises once more the question: What sort of
    “separation” or “separability” is the test of a real distinction?
    Is it separateness in and for sense perception, or separateness in
    and for intellectual thought? The former is certainly the
    fundamental index of the real distinction; for all our knowledge
    of reality originates in sense experience, and separateness in
    time and space, which marks its data, is the key to our knowledge
    of reality as a manifold of really distinct individual beings; and
    when we infer from sense-experience the actual existence of a
    _spiritual_ domain of reality we can conceive _its_ “individuals”
    only after the analogy of the corporeal individuals of our
    immediate sense experience. Scholastic philosophers, following
    Aristotle, have always taken the manifoldness of reality, _i.e._
    its presentation in sense experience in the form of “individuals,”
    of “this” and “that,” “τοδὲ τι,” “_hoc aliquid_,” as an
    unquestioned and unquestionable _real datum_. Not that they
    naïvely assumed everything _perceived by the senses_ as an
    individual, in time and space, to be really an individual: they
    realized that what is perceived by sense as _one_ limited
    continuum, occupying a definite portion of space, may be in
    reality an aggregate of many individuals; and they recognized the
    need of scrutinizing and analysing those apparent individuals in
    order to test their real individuality; but they held, and
    rightly, that sense experience does present to us some data that
    are unmistakably real individuals—individual men, for instance.
    Next, they saw that intellectual thought, by analysing sense
    experience, amasses an ever-growing multitude of abstract and
    conceptually distinct thought-objects, which it utilizes as
    predicates for the interpretation of this sense experience. These
    thought-objects intellect can unite or separate; can in some cases
    positively see to be mutually compatible or incompatible; can form
    into ideal or possible complexes. But whether or not the
    _conceptually_ distinct, though mutually compatible,
    thought-objects forming any such complex, will be also _really
    distinct_ from one another, is a question which evidently cannot
    arise until such a complex is considered as an actual or possible
    _individual being_: for it is the individual only that exists or
    can exist. They will be _really_ distinct when found actualized in
    _distinct individuals_. Even the _conceptually_ one and
    self-identical abstract thought-object will be _really distinct
    from itself_ when embodied in distinct individuals; the one single
    abstract thought-object, “humanity,” “human nature,” is really
    distinct from itself in John and in James; the humanity of John is
    _really other_ than the humanity of James.

    Of course, if conceptually distinct thought-objects are seen to be
    mutually incompatible they cannot be found realized except in
    really distinct individuals: the union of them is only an _ens
    rationis_. Again it may be that the intellect is unable to
    pronounce positively as to whether they are compatible or not
    ( ): as to whether the complex forms a possible being or not. But
    when the intellect positively sees such thought-objects to be
    mutually compatible—by interpretation of, and inference from, its
    actual sense experience of them as embodied in individuals
    ( )—and when, furthermore, it now finds a number of them
    co-existing in some one actual individual, the question recurs:
    How can it know whether they are _really distinct_ from each
    other, though actually united to form one (essentially or
    accidentally composite) individual, or only conceptually distinct
    aspects of one (simple) individual [  (_b_)]?

    This, as we have seen already, is the case for which it is really
    difficult to find a satisfactory test: and hence the different
    views to be found among scholastic philosophers as to the nature
    of the distinctions which the mind makes or discovers _within the
    individual_. The difficulty is this. The conceptual distinction
    between compatible thought-objects is not a proof of real
    distinction when these thought-objects are found united in _one
    individual_ of sense experience, as _e.g._ animality and
    rationality in man; and the only distinction given to us by sense
    experience, at least directly and immediately, as undoubtedly
    real, is the distinction _between_ corporeal _individuals_
    existing apart in space or time, as _e.g._ between man and man.
    How then, can we show that any distinctions _within the
    individual_ are real?

    Well, we have seen that certain entities, which are objects of
    sense or of thought, or of both, can disappear from the individual
    without the residue thereby perishing or ceasing to exist actually
    as an individual: the human soul survives, as an actual individual
    reality, after its separation from the material principle with
    which it formed the individual man; the individual man persists
    while the accidental modes that affect him disappear. In such
    cases as these, intellect, interpreting sense experience and
    reasoning from it, places a real distinction, in the composite
    individual, between the factors that can continue to exist without
    others, and these latter. In doing so it is apparently applying
    the analogy of the typical real distinction—that between one
    individual and another. The factor, or group of factors, which can
    continue to exist actually after the separation of the others, is
    an individual: and what were separated from it were apparently
    real entities, though they may have perished by the actual
    separation. But on what ground is the distinction between the
    material principle and the vital principle of a plant or an
    animal, for example, regarded as real? Again on the ground
    furnished by the analogy of the distinction between individuals of
    sense experience. Note that it is not between the material and the
    vital principles _as objects of abstract thought_, _i.e._ between
    the _materiality_ and the _vitality_ of the plant or the animal,
    that a real distinction is claimed: these are regarded only as
    conceptually distinct aspects of the plant or the animal; nor is
    it admitted that because one of these thought-objects is found
    embodied elsewhere in nature without the other—materiality without
    vitality in the inorganic universe—we can therefore conclude that
    they are really distinct in the plant or the animal. No; it is
    between the two principles conceived as coexisting and united in
    the concrete individual that the real distinction is claimed. And
    it is held to be a real distinction because substantial change in
    corporeal things, _i.e._ corruption and generation of individual
    corporeal substances, is held to be real. If it is real there is a
    real separation of essential factors when the individual perishes.
    And the factors continue to be real, as _potential_ principles of
    other individuals, when any individual corporeal substance
    perishes. Each principle may not continue to exist actually as
    such in isolation from the other—though some scholastics hold
    that, absolutely speaking, they could be conserved apart, as
    actual entities, by the Author of Nature. But they _can_ actually
    exist _as essential principles of other actual individuals_: they
    are real _potentialities_, which _become actual_ in other
    individuals. Thus we see that they are conceived throughout _after
    the analogy of the individual_. Those who hold that, absolutely
    speaking, the material principle as such, _materia prima_, could
    actually exist in isolation from any formative principle, should
    apparently admit that in such a case it would be _an individual
    reality_.


 . SOME QUESTIONABLE DISTINCTIONS. THE SCOTIST DISTINCTION.—The
difficulty of discriminating between the virtual and the real distinction
in an individual has given rise to the conception of distinctions which
some maintain to be real, others to be less than real. The virtual
distinction, as we have hitherto understood it, may be described as
_extrinsic_ inasmuch as it arises in the individual only when we consider
the latter under different aspects, or in different relations to things
extrinsic to it. By regarding an individual under different aspects—_e.g._
a man under the aspects of animality and rationality—we can predicate
contradictory attributes of the individual, _e.g._ of a man that “he is
similar to a horse,” and that “he is not similar to a horse”. Now it is
maintained by some that although independently of the consideration of the
mind the grounds of these contradictory predications are not _actually_
distinct in the individual, nevertheless even before such consideration
the individual has a real _intrinsic capacity_ to have these contradictory
predicates affirmed of him: they can be affirmed of him not merely when he
is regarded, and because he is regarded, under conceptually different
aspects, but because these principles, “animality” and “rationality,” are
already really in him not merely as aspects but as distinct capacities, as
potentially distinct principles of contradictory predications.

The virtual distinction, understood in this way, is described as
_intrinsic_. It is rejected by some on the ground that, at least in its
application to finite realities, it involves a violation of the principle
of contradiction: it seems to imply that one and the same individual has
in itself absolutely (and not merely as considered under different aspects
and relations) the capacity to verify of itself contradictory predicates.

Scotus and his followers go even farther than the advocates of this
intrinsic virtual distinction by maintaining the existence of a
distinction which on the one hand they hold to be less than real because
it is not between “thing and thing,” and on the other hand to be more than
logical or virtual, because it _actually_ exists between the various
thought-objects or “_formalitates_” (such, _e.g._ as animality and
rationality) in the individual, independently of the analytic activity
whereby the mind detects these in the latter. This distinction Scotists
call a “formal distinction, actual on the part of the thing”—“_distinctio
formalis_, _actualis ex natura rei_.” Hence the name “formalists” applied
to Scotists, from their advocacy of this “Scotistic” distinction. It is,
they explain, a distinction not between “things” (“_res_”) but between
“formalities” (“_formalitates_”). By “thing” as opposed to “formality”
they mean not merely the individual, but also any positive thought-object
which, though it may not be capable of existing apart, can really appear
in, or disappear from, a thing which can so exist: for instance, the
essential factors of a really composite essence, its accidental modes, and
its real relations. By “formality” they mean a positive thought-object
which is absolutely inseparable from the thing in which it is apprehended,
which cannot exist without the thing, nor the thing without it: for
instance, all the metaphysical grades of being in an individual, such as
substantiality, corporeity, life, animality, rationality, individuality,
in an individual man. The distinction is called “formal” because it is
between such “formalities”—each of which is the positive term of a
separate concept of the individual. It is called “_actual_ on the side of
the thing” because it is claimed to be _actually_ in the latter apart from
our mental apprehension of the individual. What has chiefly influenced
Scotists in claiming this distinction to be thus _actually_ in the
individual, independently of our mental activity, is the consideration
that these metaphysical grades are grounds on which we can predicate
contradictory attributes of the same individual, _e.g._ of an individual
man that “he is similar to a horse” and that “he is not similar to a
horse”: whence they infer that in order to avoid violation of the
principle of contradiction, we must suppose these grounds to be _actually_
distinct in the thing.

To this it is replied, firstly, that if such predications were truly
contradictory we could avoid violation of the principle of contradiction
only by inferring a _real_ distinction—which Scotists deny to
exist—between these grounds; secondly, that such predications are not
truly contradictory inasmuch as “he is similar” really means “he is
partially similar,” and “he is not similar” means “he is not completely
similar”; therefore when we say that a man’s rationality “_is not_ the
principle whereby he resembles a horse,” and his animality “_is_ the
principle whereby he resembles a horse,” we mean (_a_) that his
rationality is not the principle of complete resemblance, though we know
it is the principle of partial resemblance, inasmuch as we see it to be
really identical with that which is the principle of partial resemblance,
_viz._ his animality; and we mean (_b_) that his animality is the
principle of his partial resemblance to a horse, not of total resemblance,
for we know that the animality of a man is not perfectly similar to that
of a horse, the former being really identical with rationality, the latter
with irrationality. When, then, we predicate of one thing that “it is
similar to some other thing,” and that “it is not similar to this other
thing” we are not really predicating contradictories of the same thing; if
we take the predicates as contradictories they are true of the same
reality undoubtedly, but not under the same aspect. Scotists themselves
admit that the _real identity_ of these aspects involves no violation of
the principle of contradiction; why, then, should these be held to be
_actually_ distinct formalities independently of the consideration of the
mind? How can a distinction that is actual independently of the mind’s
analysis of the reality be other than real? Is not predication a work of
the mind? And must not the conditions on which reality verifies the
predication be determined by the mind? If, then, we see that in order to
justify this predication—of “similar” and “not similar”—about any reality,
it is merely necessary that the mind should apprehend this reality to be
in its undivided unity equivalent to manifold grades of being or
perfection which the mind itself can grasp as mentally distinct aspects,
by distinct concepts, how can we be justified in supposing that these
grades of being are not merely _distinguishable_, but _actually distinct_
in the reality itself, _independently of the mind_?


    The Scotist doctrine here is indicative of the tendency to
    emphasize, perhaps unduly, the assimilation of reality as a datum
    with the mind which interprets this datum; to regard the
    constitution of reality itself as being what abstract thought,
    irrespective of sense experience, would represent it; and
    accordingly to place in the reality as being actually there,
    independently of thought, distinctions which as a matter of fact
    may be merely the product of thought itself.

    Scotists, by advocating an _actual_ distinction between these
    grades of being, as “formalities” in the individual, have exposed
    themselves to the charge of extreme realism. They teach that each
    of these “formalities” has, for abstract thought, a _formal_ unity
    which is _sui generis_. And this unity is not regarded as a
    product of thought, any more than the distinction between such
    unities. Thus, the materiality apprehended by thought in all
    material things is one, not because it is made one by the
    abstracting and universalizing activity of thought, as most if not
    all other scholastics teach; it is not merely _conceptually one_
    through our thought-activity, it is _formally one_ apart from the
    latter; and it thus knits into a “formal” unity all material
    things. And so does “life” all living things; and “animality” all
    animals; and “rationality” all men. Now, if this “formal unity” of
    any such essential or metaphysical grade of being were regarded as
    a real unity, monism would be of course the logically inevitable
    corollary of the theory.

    But the “formal” unity of any such essential grade of being
    Scotists will not admit to be a real unity, though they hold it to
    be characteristic of reality independently of our thought. They
    contend that this unity is quite compatible with the _real
    plurality_ conferred upon being by the principles which
    individuate the latter; and thus they cannot be fairly accused of
    monism. Their reasoning here is characteristically subtle. Just as
    any metaphysical grade of being, considered as an object of
    thought, is in itself neither manifold individually nor one
    universally—so that, as Thomists say, designating it in this
    condition as the _universale directum_, or _metaphysicum_, or
    _fundamentale_, or _quoad rem conceptam_, we can truly affirm of
    it in this condition neither that it is one (logically, as a
    universal) nor that it is manifold (really, as multiplied in
    actual individuals),( )—so likewise, Scotists contend, it is in
    this condition _ontologically_, as an entity in the real order
    independently of thought, and as such has a unity of its own, a
    formal unity, which, while uniting in a formal unity all the
    individuals that embody it, is itself incapable of fitting this
    grade of being for actual existence, and therefore admits those
    ultimate individuating principles which make it a real manifold in
    the actual order.( )

    Thus, the metaphysical grade of being, which, as considered in
    itself, Thomists hold to be an abstraction, having no other unity
    than that which thought confers upon it by making it logically
    universal, Scotists on the contrary hold to be as such something
    positive in the ontological order, having there a “formal” unity
    corresponding to the “conceptual” or “logical” unity which thought
    confers upon it by universalizing it. The metaphysical grade of
    being, thus conceived as something positive in the real order,
    Scotists will not admit to be a “reality,” nor the unity which
    characterizes it a “real” unity. But after all, if such a
    “formality” with its proportionate “unity,” is independent of
    thought; and if on the other hand “universality” is the work of
    thought, so that the universal as such cannot be real, it is not
    easy to see how the Scotist doctrine escapes the error of extreme
    realism. The metaphysical grade of being is a “formality” only
    because it is _made abstract_ by thought; and it has “unity” only
    because it is _made logically universal_ by thought; therefore to
    contend that as such it is something positive in the real order,
    independently of thought, is to “reify” the abstract and universal
    as such: which is extreme realism.





CHAPTER V. REALITY AND THE TRUE.


 . ONTOLOGICAL TRUTH CONSIDERED FROM ANALYSIS OF EXPERIENCE.—We have seen
that when the mind thinks of any reality it apprehends it as “one,” that
ontological unity is a transcendental attribute of being; and this
consideration led us to consider the manifoldness and the distinctions
which characterize the totality of our experience. Now man himself is a
real being surrounded by all the other real beings that constitute the
universe. Moreover he finds himself endowed with faculties which bring him
into conscious relations both with himself and with those other beings;
and only by the proper interpretation of these relations can he understand
aright his place in the universe. The first in order of these relations is
that of reality to mind ( ). This relation between mind and reality is
what we understand by _Truth_.

Now truth is attributed both to knowledge and to things. We say that a
person thinks or judges _truly_, that his knowledge is _true_ (or correct,
or accurate), when things really are as he thinks or judges them to be.
The truth which we thus ascribe to knowledge, to the mind interpreting
reality, is _logical_ truth: a relation of concord or conformity of the
mind interpreting reality—or, of the mind’s judgment about reality—with
the reality itself.( ) Logical truth is dealt with in Logic and
Epistemology. We are concerned here only with the truth that is attributed
to reality, to things themselves: ontological, metaphysical,
transcendental truth, as it is called. There is nothing abstruse or
far-fetched about the use of the terms “true” and “truth” as equivalent to
“real” and “reality”. We speak of “true” gold, a “true” friend, a
“veritable” hero, etc. Now what do we mean by thus ascribing truth to a
thing? We mean that it corresponds to a mental type or ideal. We call a
liquid true wine or real wine, for instance, when it verifies in itself
the definition we have formed of the nature of wine. Hence whenever we
apply the terms “true” or “truth” to a thing we shall find that we are
considering that thing not absolutely and in itself but in reference to an
idea in our minds: we do not say of a thing simply that it is true, we say
that it is _truly such or such_ a thing, _i.e._ that it is really of a
certain nature already conceived by our minds. If the appearance of the
thing suggests comparison with some such ideal type or nature, and if the
thing is seen on examination not really to verify this nature in itself,
we say that it is not really or truly such or such a thing: _e.g._ that a
certain liquid is not really wine, or is not true wine. When we have no
such ideal type to which to refer a thing, when we do not know its nature,
cannot classify and name it, we have to suspend our judgment and say that
we do not know what the thing _really_ is. Hence, for example, the new
rays discovered by Röntgen were called provisionally “X rays,” their real
nature being at first unknown. We see, then, that real or ontological
truth is simply reality considered as conformable with an ideal type, with
an idea in the mind.

Whence does the human mind derive these ideal types, these concepts or
definitions of the nature of things? It derives them from actually
experienced reality by abstraction, comparison, generalization, and
reflection on the data of its experience.( ) Hence it follows that the
ontological truth of things is not known by the mind antecedently to the
formation of the mental type. It is, of course, in the things antecedently
to any judgment we form about the things; and the logical truth of our
judgments is dependent on it, for logical truth is the conformity of our
judgments with the real nature of things. But antecedently to all exercise
of human thought, antecedently to our conception of the nature of a thing,
the thing has not for us _formal_ or _actual_ ontological truth: it has
only fundamental or _potential_ ontological truth. If in this condition
reality had actual ontological truth for us, there would be no ground for
our distinguishing mentally between the reality and the truth of things;
whereas the existence of this mental or logical distinction is undeniable.
The concept of reality is the concept of something absolute; the concept
of ontological truth is the concept of something relative, not of an
absolute but of a relative property of being.


    But if for the human mind the ontological truth of things is—at
    least proximately, immediately, and in the first place—their
    conformity with the abstract concepts of essences or natures,
    concepts derived by the mind from an analysis of its experience,
    how can this ontological truth be one for all men, or immutable
    and necessary? For, since men form different and divergent and
    conflicting conceptions as to the natures of things, and so have
    different views and standards of truth for things, ontological
    truth would seem, according to the exposition just outlined, to be
    not one but manifold, not immutable but variable: consequences
    which surely cannot be admitted? The answer to this difficulty
    will lead us to a deeper and more fundamental conception of what
    ontological truth really is.

    First, then, we must consider that all men are endowed with the
    same sort of intellect, an intellect capable of some insight at
    least into the nature of things; that therefore they abstract the
    same transcendental notions and the same widest concepts from
    their experience: transcendental concepts of being, unity, truth,
    goodness; generic concepts of substance, matter, spirit, cause, of
    accident, quantity, multitude, number, identity, similarity,
    distinction, diversity, etc. They also form the same _specific_
    concepts of possible essences. Although, therefore, they may
    disagree and err in regard to _the application_ of those concepts,
    especially of the lower, richer and more complex specific
    concepts, to the actual data of their experience, they agree in
    the fact that they have those common concepts or idea-types of
    reality; also in the fact that when they apply those concepts
    _rightly_ (_i.e._ by _logically true_ judgments) to the things
    that make up their experience, they have so far grasped the real
    natures of these things; and finally in recognizing that the
    ontological truth of these things lies in the conformity of the
    latter with their true and proper mental types or essences. And
    just as each of these latter is one, indivisible, immutable,
    necessary and eternal ( ,  ), so is the ontological truth of
    things, whether possible or actual, one, indivisible, immutable,
    necessary and eternal. Of course, just as the human mind does not
    constitute but only apprehends reality, so the human mind does not
    constitute the ontological truth of reality, but only apprehends
    it. Every reality is capable of producing in the human mind a more
    or less adequate mental representation of itself: in this lies
    what we may call the potential or fundamental ontological truth of
    reality. When it does produce such a mental concept of itself its
    relation of conformity to this concept is its formal ontological
    truth. Of course the human mind may err in applying to any reality
    a wrong concept; when it does it has so far failed to grasp the
    real nature of the thing and therefore the ontological truth which
    is really identical with this nature. But the thing still has its
    ontological truth, independently of the erring mind; not only
    fundamental truth, but also possibly formal truth in so far as it
    may be rightly apprehended, and thus related to its proper mental
    type, by other human minds. Reality itself, therefore, is not and
    cannot be false, as we shall see more fully later; error or
    falsity is an accident only of the mind interpreting reality.


 . ONTOLOGICAL TRUTH CONSIDERED SYNTHETICALLY, FROM THE STANDPOINT OF ITS
ULTIMATE REAL BASIS.—So far we have explained ontological truth as a
relation of reality to the human intelligence; but this relation is not
one of dependence. The objective term of the relation, the reality itself,
is anterior to the human mind, it is not constituted by the latter. The
subjective term, the abstract concept, is indeed as a vital product
dependent on the mind, but as representative of reality it is determined
only by the latter. Is there, however, an Intelligence to which reality is
_essentially_ conformed, other than the human intelligence? Granted the
actual existence of contingent realities, and granted that the human mind
can derive from these realities rational principles which it sees to be
necessarily and universally applicable to all the data of experience, we
can demonstrate the existence of a Necessary Being, a First and
Self-Existent Intelligence. Realizing, then, that God has created all
things according to Infinite Wisdom, we can see that the essences of
things are imitations of exemplar ideas in the Divine Mind ( ). On the
Divine Mind they depend essentially for their reality and intelligibility.
It is because all created realities, including the human mind itself, are
adumbrations of the Divine Essence, that they are intelligible to the
human mind. Thus we see that in the ontological order, in the order of
real gradation and dependence among things, as distinct from the order of
human experience,( ) the reason why reality has ontological truth for
the human mind is because it is antecedently and essentially in accord
with the Divine Mind from which it derives its intelligibility. Although,
therefore, ontological truth is for us proximately and immediately the
conformity of reality with our own conceptions, it is primarily and
fundamentally the essential conformity of all reality with the Divine
Mind. All reality, actual and possible, including the Divine Essence
itself, is actually comprehended by the Divine Mind, is actually in
conformity with the exemplar ideas in the Divine Mind, and has therefore
ontological truth even independently of its relation to created minds; but
“in the (impossible) hypothesis of the absence of all intellect, such a
thing as truth would be inconceivable”.( )

The reason, therefore, why things are ontologically true for our minds,
why our minds can apprehend their essences, why we can have any true
knowledge about them, is in fact because both our minds and all things
else, being expressions of the Divine Essence, are in essential conformity
with the Divine Intellect. Not that we must know all this in order to have
any logical truth, any true knowledge, about things; or in order to
ascribe to things the ontological truth which consists in their conformity
with our conception of their nature. The atheist can have a true knowledge
of things and can recognize in them their conformity with his mental
conception of their nature; only he is unaware of the real and fundamental
reason why he can do so. Nor can he, of course, while denying the
existence of God, rise to the fuller conception of ontological truth which
consists in the essential conformity of all reality with the Divine
Intellect, and its essential dependence on the latter for its
intelligibility to the human intellect.

Naturally, it is this latter and fuller conception of ontological truth
that has been at all times expounded by scholastic philosophers.( ) We
may therefore, define ontological truth as _the essential conformity of
reality, as an object of thought, with intellect, and primarily and
especially with the Divine Intellect_.


    The conformity of reality with the Divine Intellect is described
    as _essential_ to reality, in the sense that the reality is
    dependent on the Divine Intellect for its intelligibility; it
    derives its intelligibility from the latter. The conformity of
    reality with the human intellect is also essential in the sense
    that _potential_ conformity with the latter is inseparable from
    reality; it is an aspect really identical with, and only logically
    distinct from, the latter. But inasmuch as the _actual_ conformity
    of reality with our human conception of it is contingent on the
    existence of human intelligences, and is not _ultimately_
    dependent on the latter, inasmuch as reality does not derive its
    intelligibility _ultimately_ from this conception—seeing that
    rather this conception is derived from the reality and is
    ultimately dependent on the Divine Exemplar,—this conformity of
    reality with the human mind is sometimes spoken of as _accidental_
    to reality in contrast with the relation of dependence which
    exists between reality and the Divine Mind.

    Bearing in mind that reality derives its intelligibility from its
    essential conformity with the Divine Mind, and that the human mind
    derives _its_ truth from the reality, we can understand how it has
    been said of truth in general that it is first in the Uncreated
    Intellect, then in things, then in created intellects; that the
    primary source and measure of all truth is the Divine Intellect
    Itself Unmeasured, “mensurans, non mensuratus”; that created
    reality is measured by, or conformed with, the Divine Intellect,
    and is in turn the measure of the human intellect, conforming the
    latter with itself, “mensurans et mensurata”; and that, finally,
    the human intellect, measured by created reality and the Divine
    Mind, is itself the measure of no natural things but only of the
    products of human art, “intellectus noster ... non mensurans
    quidem res naturales, sed artificiales tantum”.( )

    Is truth _one_, then, or is it _manifold_? Logical truth is
    manifold—multiplied by the number of created intelligences, and by
    the number of distinct cognitions in each. The primary ontological
    truth which consists in the conformity of all reality with the
    Divine Intellect is one: there is no real plurality of archetype
    ideas in the Divine Mind; they are manifold only to our imperfect
    human mode of thinking. The secondary ontological truth which
    consists in the conformity of things with the abstract concepts of
    created intelligences is conditioned by, and multiplied with, the
    manifoldness of the latter.( )

    Again to the question: Is truth _eternal_ or _temporal_?—we reply
    in a similar way that the truth of the Divine comprehension of
    reality, actual and possible, is eternal, but that no other truth
    is eternal. There is no eternal truth outside of God. Created
    things are not eternal; and truth is consecutive on reality: where
    there is no reality there is no ontological truth: the conformity
    of things with human conceptions and the logical truth of the
    latter are both alike temporal.( )

    Finally, we may say that the truth of the Divine Intellect is
    _immutable_; and so is the essential conformity of all reality
    with the Divine Intellect. The change to which created reality is
    essentially subject is itself essentially conformed with the
    Divine Mind; it is, so to speak, part and parcel of the
    ontological truth of this reality in relation to the Divine Mind,
    and cannot therefore interfere with this ontological truth. When
    the acorn grows into the oak the whole process has its ontological
    truth; that of the acorn changes, not into falsity, but into
    another truth, that of the oak.( ) We see, then, that as things
    change, their truth does not change in the sense of being lost or
    giving place to falsity: the truth of one state changes to the
    truth of another while the ontological truth of the changing
    reality perseveres immutably.

    The same immutability attaches to the truth of things in relation
    to the human mind: with the qualification, to which we shall
    return ( ), that they may occasion false judgments in the human
    mind, and on that account be designated “false”.

    Finally, the logical truth which has its seat in created
    intelligences is _mutable_: it may be increased or diminished,
    acquired or lost.


 . ONTOLOGICAL TRUTH A TRANSCENDENTAL ATTRIBUTE OF REALITY.—From what has
been said it will be apparent that ontological truth is a transcendental
attribute of reality. That is to say, whatever is real, whether actual or
possible, is ontologically true; or, in scholastic terminology, “_Omne ens
est verum; Ens et verum convertuntur_: All being is true; The real and the
true are convertible terms”. For in the first place there is no mode or
category of real being, of which the human mind actually thinks, to which
it does not attribute ontological truth in the sense of conformity with
the right human conception of it. Moreover, the proper object of the human
intellect is reality; all true knowledge is knowledge of reality. Reality
of itself is manifestly knowable, intelligible, and thus potentially or
fundamentally true; and, on the other hand, intellect is, according to the
measure of its capacity, a faculty of insight into all reality, into
whatever is real: _intellectus potens fieri omnia; anima ... quodammodo
fit omnia_.( ) Deny either of these postulates regarding the terms of
the ontological relation, reality and mind, and all rational thought is
instantly paralysed. Hence, in so far as a reality becomes an actual
object of human knowledge it has formal ontological truth in relation both
to the human mind and to the Divine Mind; while antecedently to human
thought it is fundamentally true, or intelligible, to the human mind, and
of course formally true in relation to the Divine Mind.

Thus we see that whatever is real is ontologically true; that ontological
truth is really identical with real being; that, applied to the latter, it
is not a mere extrinsic denomination, but signifies an intrinsic, positive
aspect of reality, _viz._ the real, essential, or transcendental relation
of all real being to Mind or Intellect: a relation which is logically or
conceptually distinct from the notion of reality considered in itself.

 . ATTRIBUTION OF FALSITY TO REAL BEING.—If ontological truth is really
identical with real being, if it is an essential aspect of the latter, a
transcendental relation of reality to mind, it follows immediately that
there can be no such thing as transcendental falsity: if whatever is real
is ontologically true, then the ontologically false must be the unreal,
must be nothingness. And this is really so: ontologically falsity _is_
nothingness. We have, therefore, to discover the real meaning of
attributing falsity to things, as when we speak of a false friend, false
gold, false teeth, a false musical note, a false measure in poetry, etc.

First of all, then, it will be noted that each such object has its own
real nature and character, its proper mental correlate, and, therefore,
its ontological truth. The false friend is a true or real deceiver, or
traitor, or coward, or whatever his real character may be; the false gold
is true or real bronze, or alloy, or whatever it may be in reality; the
false teeth are true or real ivory, or whatever substance they are made
of; a false musical note is a true or real note but not the proper one in
its actual setting; and so of a false measure in poetry. Next, when we
thus ascribe falsity to a friend, or gold, or such like, we see that the
epithet “false” is in reality merely transferred from the false judgment
which a person is liable to make about the object. We mean that to judge
that person a friend, or that substance gold, or those articles real
teeth, would be to form a false judgment. We see that it is only in the
judgment there can be falsity; but we transfer the epithet to the object
because the object is likely to occasion the erroneous judgment in the
fallible human mind, by reason of the resemblance of the object to
something else which it really is not. We see, therefore, that falsity is
not in the objects, but is transferred to them by a purely extrinsic
denomination on account of appearances calculated to mislead. We commonly
say, in such cases that “things mislead us,” that “appearances deceive
us”. Things, however, do not deceive or mislead us _necessarily_, but only
_accidentally_: they are the _occasions_ of our allowing ourselves to be
deceived: the fallibility and limitations of our own minds in interpreting
reality are the real cause of our erroneous judgments.( )

Secondly, there is another improper sense in which we attribute falsity to
works of art which fail to realize the artist’s ideal. In this sense we
speak of a “false” note in music, a “false” measure in poetry, a “false”
tint in painting, a “false” curve in sculpture or architecture. “False”
here means defective, bad, wanting in perfection. The object being out of
harmony with the ideal or design in the practical intellect of the artist,
we describe it as “false” after the analogy of what takes place when we
describe as “false gold” a substance which is out of harmony with the idea
of gold in the speculative intellect. It is in relation to the
speculative, not the practical, intellect, that things have ontological
truth. All created things are, of course, as such, in conformity not only
with the Divine Intellect considered as speculative, but also with the
Divine Intellect considered as practical. For God, being omnipotent, does
all things according to the designs of His Wisdom. For Him nothing is
accidental, nothing happens by chance. But the world He has freely willed
to create is not the best possible world. Both in the physical and in the
moral order there are things and events which are defective, which fall
short of their natural perfection. This defectiveness, which is properly
physical or moral evil, is sometimes described as falsity, lying, vanity,
etc., on account of the discrepancy between those things and the ideal of
what they should be. But all such defective realities are known to be what
they are by the Divine Mind, and may be known as they really are by the
human mind. They have, therefore, their ontological truth. The question of
their perfection or imperfection gives rise to the consideration of quite
a different aspect of reality, namely its _goodness_. This, then, we must
deal with in the next place.





CHAPTER VI. REALITY AND THE GOOD.


 . THE GOOD AS “DESIRABLE” AND AS “SUITABLE”.—The notion of the _good_
(L. _bonum_; Gr. ἀγαθόν) is one of the most familiar of all notions. But
like all other transcendental or widely generic concepts, the analysis of
it opens up some fundamental questions. The princes of ancient Greek
philosophy, Socrates, Plato and Aristotle, gave much anxious thought to
its elucidation. The tentative gropings of Socrates involved an ambiguity
which issued in the conflicting philosophies of Stoicism and Epicureanism.
Nor did Plato succeed in bringing down from the clouds the “Idea of the
Good” which he so devotedly worshipped as the Sun of the Intellectual
World. It needed the more sober and searching analysis of the Stagyrite to
bring to light the formula so universally accepted in after ages: The Good
of beings is that which all desire: _Bonum est quod omnia appetunt_.( )
Let us try to reach the fundamental idea underlying the terms “good,”
“goodness,” by some simple examples.

The child, deriving sensible pleasure from a sweetmeat, cries out: That is
_good_! Whatever gratifies its senses, gives it sensible delight, it
_likes_ or _loves_. Such things it _desires_, _seeks_, _yearns for_, in
their absence; and in their presence _enjoys_. At this stage the good
means simply the _pleasure-giving_. But as reason develops the human being
apprehends and describes as good not merely what is pleasure-giving, but
whatever satisfies any natural need or craving, whether purely organic, or
purely intellectual, or more widely human: food is good because it
satisfies a physical, organic craving; knowledge is good because it
satisfies a natural intellectual thirst; friendship is good because it
satisfies a wider need of the heart. Here we notice a transition from
“agreeable” in the sense of “pleasure-giving” to “agreeable” in the more
proper sense of “suitable” or useful. The good is now conceived not in the
narrow sense of what yields sensible pleasure but in the wider sense of
that which is useful or suitable for the satisfaction of a natural
tendency or need, that which is _the object of a natural tendency_.

Next, let us reflect, with Aristotle, that each of the individual persons
and things that make up the world of our direct experience has an end
towards which it naturally tends. There is a purpose in the existence of
each. Each has a nature, _i.e._ an essence which is for it a principle of
development, a source of all the functions and activities whereby it
continually adapts itself to its environment and thereby continually
fulfils the aim of its existence. By its very nature it tends towards its
end along the proper line of its development.( ) In the world of
conscious beings this natural tendency is properly called appetite: _sense
appetite_ of what is apprehended as good by sense cognition, and rational
appetite or _will_ in regard to what is apprehended as good by intellect
or reason. In the world of unconscious things this natural tendency is a
real tendency and is analogous to conscious appetite. Hence it is that
Aristotle, taking in all grades of real being, describes the good as that
which is the object of any natural tendency or “appetite” whatsoever: the
good is the “_appetibile_” or “desirable,” that which all things seek:
_bonum est quod omnia appetunt_.

 . THE GOOD AS AN “END,” “PERFECTING” THE “NATURE”.—So far, we have
analysed the notion of what is “good” _for some being_; and we have
gathered that it implies what _suits_ this being, what contributes to the
latter’s realization of its end. But we apply the term “good” to objects,
and speak of their goodness, apart from their direct and immediate
relation of helpfulness or suitability _for us_. When, for instance, we
say of a watch that it is a _good_ one, or of a soldier that he is a
_good_ soldier, what precisely do we mean by such attribution of goodness
to things or persons? A little reflection will show that it is
intelligible _only in reference to an end or purpose_. And we mean by it
that the being we describe as good has the powers, qualities, equipments,
which _fit it for its end or purpose_. A being is good whose nature is
equipped and adapted for the realization of its natural end or purpose.

Thus we see that the notion of goodness is correlative with the notion of
an end, towards which, or for which, a being has a natural tendency or
desire. Without the concept of a nature as tending to realize an end or
purpose, the notion of “the good” would be inexplicable.( ) And the two
formulæ, “The good is that which beings desire, or towards which they
naturally tend,” and “The good is that which is adapted to the ends which
beings have in their existence,” really come to the same thing; the former
statement resolving itself into the latter as the more fundamental. For
the reason why anything is desirable, why it is the object of a natural
tendency, is because it is good, and not _vice versa_. The description of
the good as that which is desirable, “_Bonum est id quod est appetibile_,”
is an _a posteriori_ description, a description of cause by reference to
effect.( ) A thing is desirable because it is good. Why then is it good,
and therefore desirable? Because it _suits_ the natural needs, and _is
adapted_ to the nature, of the being that desires it or tends towards it;
because it _helps_ this being, _agrees with_ it, by contributing towards
the realization of its end: _Bonum est id quod convenit naturæ
appetentis_: The good is that which suits the nature of the being that
desires it. The greatest good for a being is the realization of its end;
and the means towards this are also good because they contribute to this
realization.

No doubt, in beings endowed with consciousness the gradual realization of
this natural tendency, by the normal functioning and development of their
activities, is accompanied by pleasurable feeling. The latter is, in fact,
not an end of action itself, but rather the natural concomitant, the
effect and index, of the healthy and normal activity of the conscious
being: _delectatio sequitur operationem debitam_. It is the pleasure felt
in tending towards the good that reveals the good to the conscious agent:
that is, taking pleasure in its wide sense as the feeling of well-being,
of satisfaction with one’s whole condition, activities and environment.
Hence it is the anticipated pleasure, connected by past association with a
certain line of action, that stimulates the conscious being to act in that
way again. It is in the first instance because a certain operation or
tendency is felt to be _pleasing_ that it is desired, and apprehended as
_desirable_. Nor does the brute beast recognize or respond to any stimulus
of action other than pleasure. But man—endowed with reason, and reflecting
on the relation between his own nature and the activities whereby he duly
orients his life in his environment—must see that what is pleasure-giving
or “agreeable” in the ordinary sense of this term is generally so because
it is “agreeable” in the deeper sense of being “suitable to his nature,”
“adapted to his end,” and therefore “good”.

The good, then, is whatever suits the nature of a being tending towards
its end: _bonum est conveniens naturæ appetentis_. In what precisely does
this suitability consist? What suits any nature _perfects_ that nature,
and suits it precisely in so far as it perfects it. But whatever perfects
a nature does so only because and in so far as it is _a realization of the
end_ towards which this nature tends. Here we reach a new notion, that of
“perfecting” or “perfection,” and one which is as essentially connected
with the notion of “end” or “purpose,” as the concept of the “good” itself
is. Let us compare these notions of “goodness,” “end,” and “perfection”.
We have said that a watch or a soldier are good when they are adapted to
their respective ends. But they are so only because the end itself is
already good. And we may ask why any such end is itself good and therefore
desirable. For example, why is the accurate indication of time good, or
the defence of one’s country? And obviously in such a series of questions
we must come to something which is good and desirable in and for itself,
for its own sake and not as leading and helping towards some remoter good.
And this something which is good in and for itself is a last or ultimate
end—an absolute, not a relative, good. There must be such an absolute
good, such an ultimate end, if goodness in things is to be made
intelligible at all. And it is only in so far as things tend towards this
absolute good, and are adapted to it, that they can be termed good. The
realization of this tendency of things towards the absolute good, or
ultimate end, is what constitutes the goodness of those things, and it
does so because it _perfects their natures_.


    The end towards which any nature tends is the cause of this
    tendency, its _final_ cause; and the influence of a final cause
    consists precisely in its goodness, _i.e._ in its power of
    actualizing and perfecting a nature. This influence of the good is
    sometimes described as the “diffusive” character of goodness:
    _Bonum est diffusivum sui_: Goodness tends to diffuse or
    communicate itself, to multiply or reproduce itself. This
    character, which we may recognize in the goodness of finite,
    created things, is explained in the philosophy of theism as being
    derived, with this goodness itself, from the uncreated goodness of
    God who is the Ultimate End and Supreme Good of all reality. Every
    creature has its own proper ultimate end and highest perfection in
    its being a manifestation, an expression, a shewing forth, of the
    Divine Goodness. It has its own actuality and goodness, distinct
    from, but dependent on, the Divine Goodness; but inasmuch as its
    goodness is an expression or imitation of the Divine Goodness, we
    may, by an _extrinsic_ denomination, say that the creature is good
    _by the Divine Goodness_. In a similar way, and without any
    suspicion of pantheism, we may speak of the goodness of creatures
    as being a _participation_ of the Divine Goodness ( ).


 . THE PERFECT. ANALYSIS OF THE NOTION OF PERFECTION.—It is the
realization of the end or object or purpose of a nature that perfects the
latter, and so far formally constitutes the goodness of this nature. Now
the notion of perfection is not exactly the same as the notion of
goodness: although what is perfect is always good, what is good is not
always perfect. The term “perfect” comes from the Latin _perficere_,
_perfectum_, meaning fully made, thoroughly achieved, completed, finished.
Strictly speaking, it is only finite being, potential being, capable of
completion, that can be spoken of as _perfectible_, or, when fully
actualized, _perfect_. But by universal usage the term has been extended
to the reality of the Infinite Being: we speak of the latter as the
Infinitely _Perfect_ Being, not meaning that this Being has been
“perfected,” but that He is the purely Actual and Infinite Reality.
Applied to any finite being, the term “perfect” means that this being has
attained to the full actuality which we regard as its end, as the ideal of
its natural capacity and tendency. The finite being is subject to change;
it is not actualized all at once, but gradually; by the play of those
active and passive powers which are rooted in its nature it is gradually
actualized, and thus perfected, gaining more and more reality or being by
the process. But what directs this process and determines the line of its
tendency? The _good_ which is the _end_ of the being, the good towards
which the being by its nature tends. This good, which is the term of the
being’s natural tendency—which is, in other words, its end—is the
fundamental principle( ) which perfects the nature of the being, is the
source and explanation of the process whereby this nature is perfected:
_bonum est perfectivum_: _the good is the perfecting principle of
reality_. The end itself is “the good which perfects,” _bonum quod_; the
“perfecting” itself is the formal cause of the goodness of the being that
is perfected, _bonum quo_; the being itself which is perfected, and
therefore ameliorated or increased in goodness, is the _bonum cui_. In
proportion, therefore, to the degree in which a being actually possesses
the perfection due to its nature it is “good”; in so far as it lacks this
perfection, it is wanting in goodness, or is, as we shall see,
ontologically “bad” or “evil”.

While, then, the notion of the “good” implies a relation of the appetite
or natural tendency of a being towards its end, the notion of
“perfection,” or “perfecting,” conveys to our minds actual reality simply,
or the actualizing of reality. The term “perfection” is commonly used as
synonymous with actual reality. In so far forth as a reality is actual we
say it “has perfection”. But we do not call it “perfect” _simply_, unless
it has all the actuality we conceive to be due to its nature: so long as
it lacks any of this it is only perfect _secundum quid_, _i.e._ in
proportion to the actuality it does possess. Hence we define “the perfect”
as _that which is actually lacking in nothing that is due to its nature_.
The perfect is therefore not simply the good, but the complete or finished
good; and it is even logically distinct from the latter, inasmuch as the
actuality connoted by the former has added to it the relation to appetite
connoted by the latter. Similarly “goodness” is logically distinct from
“perfection” by adding the like relation to the latter. Although a thing
has goodness in so far as it has perfection, and _vice versa_, still its
perfection is its actuality simply, while its goodness is this actuality
considered as the term of its natural appetite or tendency.

 . GRADES OF PERFECTION. REALITY AS STANDARD OF VALUE.—We may distinguish
between stages of perfection in the changing reality of the same being, or
grades of perfection in comparing with one another different classes or
orders of being.

In one and the same being we may distinguish between what is called its
_first_ or _essential_ perfection, which means its essence or nature
considered as capable of realizing its purpose in existence by tending
effectively towards its end; what is called its _intermediate_ or
_accidental_ perfection, which consists in all the powers, faculties and
functions whereby this tendency is gradually actualized; and what is
called its _final_ or _integral_ perfection, which consists in its full
actualization by complete attainment of its end.

Again, comparing with one another the individual beings that make up our
experience, we classify them, we arrange them in a hierarchical order of
relative “perfection,” of inferiority or superiority, according to the
different grades of reality or perfection which we think we apprehend in
them. Thus, we look on living things as a higher, nobler, more perfect
order of beings than non-living things, on animal life as a higher form of
being than plant life, on intelligence as higher than instinct, on will as
superior to sense appetite, on mind or spirit as nobler than matter, and
so on. Now all such comparisons involve the apprehension of some standard
of value. An estimation of relative values, or relative grades of
perfection in things, is unintelligible except in reference to some such
standard; it involves of necessity the intuition of such a standard. We
feel sure that some at least of our appreciations are unquestionably
correct: that man, for instance, is superior to the brute beast, and the
latter superior to the plant; that the lowest manifestation of life—in the
amœba, or whatever monocellular, microscopic germ may be the lowest—is
higher on the scale of being than the highest expression of the
mechanical, chemical and physical forces of the inorganic universe. And if
we ask ourselves what is our standard of comparison, what is our test or
measure, and why are we sure of our application of it in such cases, our
only answer is that our standard of comparison is reality itself, actual
being, perfection; that we rely implicitly on our intuition of such actual
reality as manifested to us in varying grades or degrees within our
experience; that without claiming to be infallible in our judgments of
comparison, in our classifications of things, in our appreciations of
their relative perfection, we may justly assume reality itself to be as
such intelligible, and the human mind to be capable of obtaining some true
and certain insight into the nature of reality.

 . THE GOOD, THE REAL, AND THE ACTUAL.—Having compared “perfection” with
“goodness” and with “being,” let us next compare the two latter notions
with each other. We shall see presently that every actual being has its
ontological goodness, that these are in reality identical. But there is a
logical distinction between them. In the first place the term “being” is
applied _par excellence_ to substances rather than to accidents. But we do
not commonly speak of an individual substance, a person or thing, as good
in reference to essential or substantial perfection.( ) When we describe
a man, or a machine, as “good,” we mean that the man possesses those
_accidental_ perfections, those qualities and endowments, which are
suitable to his nature as a man; that the machine possesses those
properties which adapt it to its end. In the second place the notion of
being is absolute; that of the good is relative, for it implies the notion
not of reality simply but of reality as desirable, agreeable, suitable, as
perfecting the nature of a subject, as being the end, or conducive to the
end, towards which this nature tends. And since what thus _perfects_ must
be something not potential but actual, it follows that, unlike real truth,
real goodness is identical not with potential, but only with actual
reality. It is not an attribute of the abstract, possible essence, but
only of the concrete, actually existing essence.( )

From the fact that the notion of the good is relative it follows that the
same thing can be simultaneously good and bad in different relations:
“What is one man’s meat is another man’s poison”.

 . KINDS OF GOODNESS; DIVISIONS OF THE GOOD.—(_a_) The goodness of a
being may be considered in relation to this being itself, or to other
beings. What is good for a being itself, what makes it intrinsically and
formally good, _bonum sibi_, is whatever perfects it, and in the fullest
sense the realization of its end. Hence we speak of a virtuous, upright
man, whose conduct is in keeping with his nature and conducive to the
realization of his end, as a good man. But a being may also be good to
others, _bonum alteri_, by an extrinsic, active, effective goodness,
inasmuch as by its action it may help other beings in the realization of
their ends. In this sense, a beneficent man, who wishes the well-being of
his fellow-men and helps them to realize this well-being, is called a good
man. This kind of goodness is what is often nowadays styled
_philanthropy_; in Christian ethics it is known as _charity_.

(_b_) We have described the good as the term or object of natural tendency
or appetite. In the domain of beings not endowed with the power of
conscious apprehension, determinism rules this natural tendency; this
latter is always oriented towards the _real_ good: it never acts amiss: it
is always directed by the Divine Wisdom which has given to things their
natures. But in the domain of conscious living agents this natural
tendency is consequent on apprehension: it takes the form of instinctive
animal appetite or of rational volition. And since this apprehension of
the good may be erroneous, since what is not really good but evil may be
apprehended as good, the appetite or will, which follows this
apprehension—_nil volitum nisi praecognitum_—may be borne towards evil
_sub ratione boni_. Hence the obvious distinction between _real good_ and
_apparent good_—_bonum verum_ and _bonum apparens_.

(_c_) In reference to any individual subject—a man, for instance—it is
manifest that _other_ beings can be good for him in so far as any of them
can be his end or a means to the attainment of his end. They are called in
reference to him _objective goods_, and their goodness _objective
goodness_. But it is equally clear that they are good for him only because
he can perfect his own nature by somehow identifying or uniting himself
with them, possessing, using, or enjoying them. This possession of the
objective good constitutes what has been already referred to as _formal_
or _subjective goodness_.( )

(_d_) We have likewise already referred to the fact that in beings endowed
with consciousness and appetite proper, whether sentient or rational, the
function of possessing or attaining to what is objectively good, to what
suits and perfects the nature of the subject, has for its natural
concomitant a feeling of pleasure, satisfaction, well-being, delight,
enjoyment. And we have observed that this pleasurable feeling may then
become a stimulus to fresh desire, may indeed be desired for its own sake.
Now this subjective, pleasure-giving possession of an objective good has
been itself called by scholastics _bonum delectabile_—delectable or
delight-giving good. The objective good itself considered as an end, and
the perfecting of the subject by its attainment, have been called _bonum
honestum_—good which is really and _absolutely_ such _in itself_. While if
the good in question is really such only when considered as a means to the
attainment of an end, of something that is good in itself, the former is
called _bonum utile_—useful good.( )

In this important triple division _bonum honestum_ is used in the wide
sense in which it embraces any _real_ good, whether physical or moral. As
applied to man it would therefore embrace whatever perfects his physical
life as well as whatever perfects his nature considered as a rational, and
therefore moral, being. But in common usage it has been restricted to the
latter, and is in this sense synonymous with _moral good_, _virtue_.( )

Furthermore, a good which is an end, and therefore desirable for its own
sake, whether it be physical or moral, can be at the same time a means to
some higher good and desired for the sake of this latter. Hence St.
Thomas, following Aristotle, reduces all the moral goods which are
desirable in themselves to two kinds: that which is desirable only for
itself, which is the last end, final felicity; and those which, while good
in themselves, are also conducive to the former, and these are the
virtues.( )


    When these various kinds of goodness are examined in reference to
    the nature, conduct and destiny of man, they raise a multitude of
    problems which belong properly to Ethics and Natural Theology. The
    fact that man has a composite nature which is the seat of various
    and conflicting tendencies, of the flesh and of the spirit; that
    he perceives in himself a “double law,” a higher and a lower
    appetite; that he is subject to error in his apprehension of the
    good; that he apprehends a distinction between pleasure and duty;
    that he feels the latter to be the path to ultimate happiness,—all
    this accentuates the distinction between real and apparent good,
    between _bonum honestum_, _bonum utile_, and _bonum delectabile_.
    The existence of God is established in Natural Theology; and in
    Ethics, aided by Psychology, it is proved that no finite good can
    be the last end of man, that God, the Supreme, Infinite Good, is
    his last end, and that only in the possession of God by knowledge
    and love can man find his complete and final felicity.


 . GOODNESS A TRANSCENDENTAL ATTRIBUTE OF BEING.—We have shown that there
is a logical distinction between the concept of “goodness” and that of
“being”. We have now to show that the distinction is not real, in other
words, that goodness is a transcendental attribute of all actual reality,
that all being, in so far forth as it is actual, has
goodness—transcendental or ontological goodness in the sense of
_appetibility_, _desirability_, _suitability_, as already explained.

When the thesis is formulated in the traditional scholastic statement,
“_Omne ens est bonum_: _All being is good_” it sounds a startling paradox.
Surely it cannot be contended that everything is good? A cancer in the
stomach is not good; lies are not good; yet these are actual realities;
cancers exist and lies are told; therefore not every reality is good. This
is unquestionably true. But it does not contradict the thesis rightly
understood. The true meaning of the thesis is, not that every being is
good in all respects, or possesses such goodness as would justify us in
describing it as “good” in the ordinary sense, but that every being
possesses some goodness: every being in so far as it has actuality has
formal, intrinsic goodness, or is, in other words, the term or object of
natural tendency or desire. This goodness, which we predicate of any and
every actual being, may be ( ) the term of the natural tendency or
appetite of that being itself, _bonum sibi_, or ( ) it may be conceivably
the term of the appetite of some other being, _bonum alteri_. Let us see
whether it can be shown that every actual being has goodness in one or
both of these senses.

( ) _Bonum sibi_.—Is there any intelligible sense in which it can be said
that the actuality of any and every existing being is _good for that
being_—_bonum sibi_? There is. For if we recognize in every such being, as
we must, a _nature_, a potentiality of further actualization, a tendency
towards a state of fuller actuality which is its _end_; and if,
furthermore, we recognize that every such being at any instant not merely
_is_ or exists, but is _becoming_ or _changing_, and thereby tending
effectively towards its end; we must admit not merely that the full
attainment of its end (its integral or final perfection) is “desired” by,
and “perfects,” and is “good” for, that being’s nature; but also that the
partial realization of its end, or, in other words, the actuality it has
at any instant in its changing condition of existence (its accidental or
intermediate perfection) is similarly “good” for it; and even that its
actual existence as compared with its mere possibility (its first or
essential perfection) is “desirable” and “good” for its nature. Actually
existing beings are intelligible only because they exist for some end or
purpose, which, by their very existence, activities, operations, conduct,
they tend to realize. If this be admitted we cannot deny that the full
attainment of this end or purpose is “good” for them—suitable, desirable,
agreeable, perfecting them. In so far as they fail in this purpose they
are wanting in goodness, they are bad, evil. For the realization of their
end their natures are endowed with appropriate powers, faculties, forces,
by the normal functioning of which they gradually develop and grow in
actuality. No real being is by nature inert or aimless; no real being is
without its connatural faculties, forces and functions. But the natural
result of all operation, of all action and interaction among things, is
_actualization_ of the potential, amelioration, development, growth in
perfection and goodness by gradual realization of ends. If by accident any
of these powers is wanting, or acts amiss by failing to contribute its due
perfection to the nature, there is in the being a proportionate want of
goodness—it is so far bad, evil. But, even so, the nature of the thing
preserves its fundamental orientation towards its end, towards the
perfection natural to it, and struggles as it were against the evil—tries
to make good the deficiency. A cancer in the stomach is never good _for
the stomach_, or _for the living subject_ of which the stomach is an
organ. For the living being the cancer is an evil, a _failure_ of one of
the organs to discharge its functions normally, _an absence of a good_,
_viz._ the healthy functioning of an organ. But the cancerous growth,
considered in itself and for itself, biologically and chemically, has its
own nature, purpose, tendencies, laws; nor can we deny that its
development according to these laws is “good” for its specific
nature,( ) _bonum sibi_.

It may be asked how can the _first_ or _essential_ perfection of an
existing substance, which is nothing else than the actual existence of the
nature itself, be conceived as “good” for this nature? It is so inasmuch
as the actual existence of the substance is the first stage in the process
by which the nature tends towards its end; an existing nature desires and
tends towards the conservation of its own being;( ) hence the saying,
“Self-preservation is the first law of nature”; and hence, too, the
scholastic aphorism, “_Melius est esse quam non esse_”.

The argument just outlined tends to show that every nature of which we can
have direct experience, or in other words every finite, contingent nature,
is _bonum sibi_, formally and intrinsically good for itself.

It is, of course, equally applicable to the Uncreated, Necessary Being
Himself. The Infinite Actuality of the Divine Nature is essentially the
term and end of the Divine Love. Therefore every actual being has
intrinsic, formal goodness, whereby it is _bonum sibi_, _i.e._ its
actuality is, in regard to its nature, really an object of tendency,
desire, appetite, a something that really suits and perfects this nature.
Thus understood, the thesis formulates no mere tautology. It makes a real
assertion about real being; nor can the truth of this assertion be proved
otherwise than by an argument based, as ours is, on the recognition of
purpose, of final causality, of adaptation of means to ends, in the actual
universe of our experience.

Notwithstanding all that has been said, it may still be asked why should
those individual beings, whose existence we have claimed to be good for
them, exist at all. It will be objected that there exist multitudes of
beings whose existence is manifestly _not_ good for them. Take, for
instance, the case of the reprobate. If they wish their total
annihilation, if they desire the total cessation of their being, rather
than an existence of eternal punishment, they undoubtedly wish it _as a
good_. Is annihilation or absolute non-existence _really_ a good _for
them_? _De facto_ it is _for them_, considered _in their actual condition_
which is _accidental to their nature_. Christ said of the scandal-giver
what is surely true of the reprobate: “It were better for that man had he
never been born”. We may admit, therefore, that for the reprobate
themselves simple non-existence is more desirable, and better, than their
actual concrete state of existence as reprobate: because simple
non-existence is for them the simple _negation_ of their reality, whereas
the absolute and irreparable loss of their last end, the total frustration
of the purpose for which they came into being, is for them the greatest
conceivable _privation_. But this condition of the reprobate is accidental
to their nature, alien to the purpose of their being, a self-incurred
failure, a deliberate thwarting of their natural tendency. It remains
true, therefore, that their nature is good though incapable of progress,
its purpose is good though frustrated. In so far as they have actual
reality they have “essential” goodness. Their _natures_ still tend towards
self-conservation and the realization of their end. They form no _real_
exception to the general truth that “it is better to be than not to be:
_melius est esse quam non esse_”. It is not annihilation as such that is
desired by them, but only as a less evil alternative than the eternal
privation of their last end.( ) If the evils accidentally and actually
attaching to a certain state of existence make the continuance of _this
state_ undesirable for a being, it by no means follows that the
continuance of this being in existence, simply and in itself, is less
desirable than non-existence.

( ) BONUM ALTERI.—Even, however, if it were granted that the actual
existence of some beings is not good for _themselves_, might it not
nevertheless be good for _other beings_, and in relation to the general
scheme of things? Is there not an intelligible sense in which _every_
actual being is _bonum alteri_, good for other things? Here again the same
experience of actual reality, which teaches us that each individual being
has a nature whereby it tends to its own good as a particular end, also
teaches us that in the general scheme of reality things are helpful to one
another, nay, are intended by their interaction and co-operation with one
another to subserve the wider end which is the good of the whole system of
reality. There is little use in puzzling, as people sometimes do, over the
_raison d’être_ of individual things or classes of things in human
experience, over the good or the evil of the existence of these things,
over the question whether or not it would be better that these things
should never have existed, until we have consulted not any isolated
portion of human experience but _this experience as a whole_. In this we
can find sufficient evidence for the prevalence of a beneficent purpose
everywhere. Not that we can read this purpose in every detail of reality.
Even when we have convinced ourselves that all creation is the work of a
Supreme Being who is Infinite Goodness Itself, we cannot gain that full
insight into the secret designs of His Providence, which would be needed
in order to “justify His ways” in all things. But when we have convinced
ourselves that the created universe exists because God wills it, we can
understand that every actual reality in it must be “good,” as being an
object or term of the Divine Will. Every created reality is thus _bonum
alteri_ inasmuch as it is good for God, not, of course, in the impossible
sense of perfecting Him, but as an imitation and expression of the
Goodness of the Divine Nature Itself. The experience which enables us to
reach a knowledge of the existence and nature of God, the Creator,
Conserver, and Providence of the actual universe, also teaches us that
this universe can have no other ultimate end or good than God Himself,
_i.e._ God’s will to manifest His goodness by the extrinsic glory which
consists in the knowledge and love of Him by His rational creatures. The
omnipotence of the Creator, His freedom in creating, and our knowledge of
the universe He has actually chosen to create from among indefinite
possible worlds, all alike convince us that the actual world is neither
the best possible nor the worst possible, _absolutely_ speaking. But our
knowledge of His wisdom and power also convinces us that for the purpose
of manifesting His glory in the measure and degree in which He has
actually chosen to manifest it by creating the existing universe, and
_relatively_ to the attainment of this specific purpose, the existing
universe is the best possible.

 . OPTIMISM AND PESSIMISM.—Those few outlines of the philosophy of
theism—theses established in Natural Theology—will reveal to us the place
of theism in relation to “optimist” and “pessimist” systems of philosophy.
Pessimism, as an outcome of philosophical speculation, is the proclamation
in some form or other of the conviction that human existence, nay,
existence in general, is a failure, an evil. It is the analogue, in
relation to will, of what scepticism is in relation to intellect; and it
is no less self-contradictory than the latter. While the latter points to
total paralysis of thought, the former involves a like paralysis of all
will, all effort, all purpose in existence—a philosophy of despair,
despondency, gloom. Both are equally erroneous, equally indicative of
philosophical failure, equally repugnant to the normal, healthy mind.
Optimism on the other hand is expressive of the conviction that good
predominates in all existence: _melius est esse quam non esse_; that at
the root of all reality there is a beneficent purpose which is ever being
realized; that there is in things not merely a truth that can be known but
a goodness that can be loved. Existence is not an evil, life is not a
failure. This is a philosophy of hope, buoyancy, effort and attainment.
But is it true, or is it an empty illusion? Well, to maintain that the
actual universe is the best absolutely, would, of course, be absurd. If
Leibniz’s “Principle of Sufficient Reason” obliged him to contend, in face
of the painfully palpable facts of physical and moral evil in the
universe, that this universe is the best absolutely possible, the best
that God could create, we can only say: so much the worse for his
“Principle”. The true optimism is that of the theist who, admitting the
prevalence of evil in the universe, in the sense to be explained
presently, at the same time holds that throughout creation the good
predominates, that God’s beneficent purpose in regard to individuals does
in the main prevail, and that His glory is manifested in giving to
rational creatures the perfection and felicity of knowing and loving
Himself. For the theist, then, the problem of the existence of evil in the
universe assumes the general form of reconciling the fact of evil in God’s
creation with the fact of God’s infinite power and goodness. This is a
problem for Natural Theology. Here we have merely to indicate some general
principles arising from the consideration of evil as the correlative and
antithesis of goodness.

 . EVIL: ITS NATURE AND CAUSES. MANICHEISM.—Admitting the existence of
evil in the universe, the scholastic apparently withdraws the admission
forthwith by denying the reality of evil. The paradox explains itself by
comparing the notions of good and evil, and thus trying to arrive at a
proper conception of the latter.

If ontological goodness is really identical with actual being, if being is
good in so far as it is actual, then it would appear that ontological evil
must be identical with non-being, nothingness. And so it is, in the sense
that no evil is a positive, actual reality, that all evil is an absence of
reality. But just as the good, though really identical with the actual, is
nevertheless logically distinct from the latter, so is evil logically
distinct from nothingness, or the absence of reality. As we have seen, the
good is that which perfects a nature, that which is due to a nature as the
realization of the end of the latter. So, too, is evil the _privation_ of
any perfection due to a nature, the absence of something positive and
something which ought to be present. Evil, therefore, is not a mere
negation or absence of being; it is the absence of a good, or in other
words the absence of a reality that should be present. All privation is
negation, but not _vice versa_; for privation is the negation of something
_due_: the absence of virtue is a mere negation in an animal, in man it is
a privation. Hence the commonly accepted definition of evil: _Malum est
privatio boni debiti_: _Evil is the privation of the goodness due to a
thing_.( ) Evil is always, therefore, a defect, a deficiency. The notion
of evil is a relative, not an absolute notion. As goodness is the right
relation of a nature to its proper end, so is evil a failure, a defect in
this relation: _Malum est privatio ordinis ad finem debitum_.( )

The very finiteness of a finite being is the absence of further reality in
this being; but as this further reality is not due to such a being, its
absence, which has sometimes been improperly described as “metaphysical
evil,” is not rightly regarded as evil at all: except, indeed, we were to
conceive it as happening to the Infinite Being Himself, which would be a
contradiction in thought.

Evil, then, in its formal concept is nothing positive; it is essentially
negative, or rather privative. For this very reason, when we consider evil
in the concrete, _i.e._ as affecting actual things, as occurring in the
actual universe—we can scarcely speak of it with propriety as
“existing,”—we see that it essentially involves some positive, real
subject which it affects, some nature which, by affecting, it renders so
far evil. Cancer in the stomach is a real evil of the stomach, a defect, a
deficiency, a failure, in the adaptation of the stomach to its proper end.
It is not itself a positive, absolute, _evil entity_. In so far as it is
itself a positive, physical reality, a growth of living cells, it has its
own nature, its natural tendency, its development towards an end in
accordance with biological laws: in all of which it verifies the
definition of ontological goodness. But the existence of such a growth in
the stomach is pathological, _i.e._ a disease of the stomach, a prevention
of the natural, normal function of the stomach, a _failure of the latter’s
adaptation to its end_, and hence an _evil for the stomach_. Lying, too,
is an evil, a moral evil of man as a moral subject. But this does not mean
that the whole physical process of thinking, judging, speaking, whereby a
man lies, is itself a positive evil entity. The thinking is itself good as
a physical act. So is the speaking in itself good as a physical act.
Whatever of positive reality there is in the whole process is good,
ontologically good. But there is a _want of conformity_ of the language
with the thought, entailing a _privation_ or _failure of adaptation_ of
the man as a moral subject with his end, with his real good; and in this
failure of adaptation, this privation of goodness, lies the moral evil of
lying.

Evil, then, has a _material_ or subjective cause, _viz._ some positive,
actual reality, which is good in so far forth as it is actual, but which
is evil, or wanting in something due to it, in so far as the privation
which we have called evil affects it.

But evil has no _formal_ cause: formally it is not a reality but a
privation: “evil has no formal cause, but is rather the privation of a
form”.( )

Nor has evil any _final_ cause, for it consists precisely in the failure
of a being’s natural tendency towards its end, in the want of adaptation
of a nature to its end: “nor has evil a final cause, but is rather the
privation of a being’s due relation to its natural end”.( ) Evil cannot
be the natural result of a being’s tendency towards its end, or a means to
the attainment of this end. For that which is really an end must be good,
and a means derives its goodness from the end to which it is a means. The
good, because it is an end, or a means to an end, is desirable; and so,
too, might evil be defined _a posteriori_ as that which is the object of
no natural tendency or desire, that from which all things are averse:
_malum est quod nullum ens appetit, vel a quo omnia aversantur_. Nor can
evil be itself an end, or be as such desired or desirable. Real evil is no
doubt often sought and desired by conscious beings, sometimes physical
evil, sometimes moral evil. But it is always desired and embraced as a
good, _sub specie boni_, _i.e._ when apprehended as here and now good in
the sense of gratifying, pleasure-giving, _bonum delectabile_. This is
possible because _pleasure_, especially organic, sensible pleasure, as
distinct from the state of real well-being which characterizes true
_happiness_, is not the exclusive concomitant of seeking and possessing a
_real_ good: it often accompanies the seeking and possessing of a merely
apparent good: and in such cases it is itself a merely apparent good, and
in reality evil. The unfortunate man who commits suicide does not embrace
evil as such. He wrongly judges death to be good, as being in his view a
lesser evil than the miseries of his existence, and under this aspect of
goodness he embraces death.

Finally we have to inquire whether evil has an _efficient_ cause. Seeing
that it is not merely a logical figment, seeing that it really affects
actual things, that it really occurs in the actual universe, it must have
a real source among the efficient causes of these actual things that make
up the universe. It is undoubtedly due to the action of efficient causes,
_i.e._ to the _failure_, the _defective_ action, of efficient causes. But
being itself something negative, a privation, it cannot properly be said
to have an “efficient” cause; for the influence of an efficient cause is
positive action, which in turn must have for its term something positive,
something real, and therefore good. Hence St. Augustine very properly says
that evil should be described as having a “_deficient_” cause rather than
an “efficient” cause.( ) In other words, evil is not the direct, natural
or normal result of the activity of efficient causes; for this result is
always good. It must therefore be always an indirect, abnormal, accidental
consequence of their activity. Let us see how this can be—firstly in
regard to physical evil, then in regard to moral evil.

In the action of physical causes we may distinguish between the operative
agencies themselves and the subjects in which the effects of these
operations are produced. Sometimes the effect is wanting in due
perfection, or is in other words imperfect, physically evil, because of
some defect in the agencies: the statue may be defective because the
sculptor is unskilled, or his instruments bad; offspring may be weak or
malformed owing to some congenital or accidental weakness or unfitness in
the parents. Sometimes the evil in the effect is traceable not to the
agents but to the materials on which they have to work: the sculptor and
his instruments may be perfect, but if there be a flaw in the marble the
statue will be a failure; the educator may be efficient, but if the pupil
be wanting in aptitude or application the results cannot be “good”.

All this, however, does not carry us very far, for we must still inquire
_why_ are the agencies, or the materials, themselves defective. Moreover,
physical evil sometimes occurs without any defect either in the agencies
or in the materials. The effect produced may be incompatible with some
minor perfection already in the subject; it can then be produced only at
the sacrifice of this minor perfection: which sacrifice is for the subject
_pro tanto_ an evil. It is in the natural order of things that the
production of a new “form” or perfection excludes the actuality of a
pre-existing form or perfection. All nature is subject to change, and we
have seen that all change is ruled by the law: _Generatio unius est
corruptio alterius_. It might perhaps be said that this privation or
supplanting of perfections in things by the actualization in these things
of incompatible perfections, is inherent in the nature of things and
essential to their finiteness—at least, if we regard the things not
individually but as parts of a whole, as members of a system, as
subserving a general scheme;—and that therefore such privation should not
be regarded as physical evil proper, but rather as “metaphysical” evil,
improperly so called. However we regard it, it can have no other first
source than the Will of the Creator decreeing the actual order of the
existing universe. And the same must be said of the physical evils proper
that are incident to the actual order of things. These evils are
“accidental” when considered in relation to the individual natures of the
created agencies and materials. They are defects or failures of natural
tendencies: were these natural tendencies always realized there would be
no such evils. But they are not realized; and their “failure” or “evil” is
not “accidental” in regard to God; for God has willed and created these
agencies with natural tendencies which He has destined to be fulfilled not
always and in every detail, but in such measure as will secure the actual
order of the universe and show forth His perfections in the finite degree
in which He has freely chosen to manifest these perfections. The world He
has chosen to create is not the best absolutely possible: there are
physical evils in it; but it is the best for the exact purpose for which
He created it.

There is also moral evil in the universe. In comparison with moral evil,
the physical defects in God’s creation—physical pain and suffering,
material privations and hardships, decay and death of living things—are
not properly evils at all. At least they are not evils in the same
profound sense as the deliberate turning away of the moral agent from God,
his Last End and Ultimate Good, is an evil. For the physical evils
incident to individual beings in the universe can be not only foreseen by
God but accepted and approved, so to speak, by His Will, as subserving the
realization of the total physical good which He wills in the universe; and
as subordinate to, and instrumental in the realization of, the moral good
of mankind: for it is obvious that in the all-wise designs of Providence
physical evils such as pain, suffering, poverty, hunger, etc., may be the
means of realizing moral goodness. But moral evil, on the contrary, or, in
the language of Christian ethics, _Sin_—the conscious and deliberate
rejection, by the free agent, of God who is his true good—though
necessarily foreseen by God in the universe He has actually chosen to
create, and therefore necessarily permitted by the Will of God
consequently on this foresight, cannot have been and cannot be intended or
approved by Him. Having created man an intelligent and free being, God
could not will or decree the revolt of the latter from Himself. He loves
essentially His own Infinite Goodness: were He to identify His Will with
that of the sinning creature He would at the same time be turning away
from His Goodness: which is a contradiction in terms. God, therefore, does
not will moral evil. Nevertheless He permits it: otherwise it would not
occur, for nothing can happen “against His will”. He has permitted it by
freely choosing to create this actual universe of rational and free
creatures, foreseeing that they would sin. He could have created instead a
universe of such beings, in which there would be no moral evil: for He is
omnipotent. Into the secrets of His election it is not given to finite
minds to penetrate. Acknowledging His Infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness,
realizing at the same time the finiteness of our faculties, we see how
rational it is to bow down our minds with St. Paul and to exclaim in
admiration: “O, the depth of the riches of the wisdom and of the knowledge
of God! How incomprehensible are His judgments, and how unsearchable His
ways!”( )

If it be objected that God’s permission of moral evil in the universe is
really the cause of this evil, and makes God Himself responsible for sin
and its consequences, a satisfactory answer is not far to seek. It is
absolutely incompatible with God’s Infinite Sanctity that He be
responsible for sin and its consequences. For these the free will of the
creature is _alone_ responsible. The creation of intelligent beings,
endowed with the power _freely_ to love, honour and serve God, is the most
marvellous of all God’s works. Free will is the noblest endowment of a
creature of God, as it is also the most mysterious. Man, who by his
intelligence has the power to know God as his Supreme Good, has by his
will the power _freely_ to tend towards God and attain to the possession
of God as his Last End. In so far as man sins, _i.e._ knowingly,
deliberately, and freely violates the tendency of his nature towards God
by turning away from Him, he and he alone is responsible for the
consequences, because he has the power to accomplish what he knows to be
God’s design in his regard, and to be his true destiny and path to
happiness—_viz._ that he tend towards union with God and the possession of
God—and he deliberately fails to make use of this power. Such failure and
its consequences are, therefore, his own; they leave absolutely untouched
and unassailed the Infinite Goodness and Benevolence of God’s eternal
design in his regard.

In scholastic form, the objection is proposed and answered in this way:
“The cause of a cause is the cause of the latter’s effects; but God is the
cause of man, and sin is the latter’s effect; therefore God is the cause
of sin”. “That the cause of a _non-free_ cause is the cause of the
latter’s effects, we admit. That the cause of a _free_ cause is the cause
of the latter’s effects, at least in the sense of permitting, without
intending and being thereby responsible for them, we also admit; always in
the sense of intending and being responsible for them, we deny. The
_positive effects_ of a created free cause, those which the latter by
nature is intended to produce, are attributable to the first cause or
creator of the free cause, and the first cause is responsible for them.
The _failures_ of the created free cause to produce its natural and
intended effects, are not due to the first cause; they are not intended
by, nor attributable to, the first cause; nor is the latter responsible
for them: they are failures of the free cause, and of him alone; though
they are of course foreseen and permitted by the first cause or creator of
the latter. The minor premiss of the objection we may admit—noting,
however, that sin is not properly called an effect, but rather, like all
evil, a _failure_ of some cause to produce its connatural effect: it is a
defect, a deficiency, a privation of some effect, of some positive
perfection, which the cause ought naturally to have produced. The
conclusion of the objection we distinguish, according to our analysis of
the major premiss: God is the cause of sin in the proper sense of
intending it, willing it, and producing it positively, and being thereby
responsible for it, we deny; God is the cause of sin in the improper sense
of merely foreseeing and permitting it as incidental to the universe He
has actually willed and decreed to create, as occurring in this universe
by the deliberate failure of free creatures to conform themselves to His
primary benevolent intention in their regard, we may grant. And this
Divine permission of moral evil cannot be shown to be incompatible with
any attribute of the Divinity.”

In the preceding paragraphs we have barely outlined the principles on
which the philosophy of theism meets the problem of evil in the universe.
We have made assumptions which it is the proper province of Natural
Theology to establish, and to that department also we must refer the
student for a fuller treatment of the whole problem.

It has been sometimes said that the fact of evil in the universe is one of
the greatest difficulties against the philosophy of Theism. If this be
taken as an insinuation that the fact of evil can be better explained—or
even as well explained—on the assumptions of Pantheism, Monism,
Manicheism, or any other philosophy besides Theism, it is false. If it
means simply that in accounting for evil—whether on principles of Theism
or of any other philosophy—we are forced to raise some ultimate questions
in the face of which we must admit that we have come upon depths of
mystery which the plummet of our finite intellects cannot hope to fathom,
in this sense indeed the assertion may be admitted. As we have already
hinted, even with the light of the Christian Revelation to aid the natural
light of reason, there are questions about the existence and causes of
evil which we may indeed ask, but which we cannot adequately answer. And
obviously this is no reflection on Theism; while in the latter system we
have a more intelligible and more satisfactory analysis of the problem
than in any other philosophy.

Among the ancient Greek philosophers we find “matter” (ὕλη) identified
with “vacuum” or “empty space” (το κενόν) and this again with
“nothingness” or non-being (τὸ μη νὀ). Now the concept of evil is the
concept of something negative—a privation of goodness, of being or
reality. Thus the notion of evil came to be associated with the notion of
matter. But the latter notion is not really negative: it is that of a
formless, chaotic, disorderly material. When, therefore, the Manicheans
attributed a positive reality to evil—conceiving it as the principle of
all disorder, strife, discord—they naturally regarded all matter as the
expression of the Evil Principle, in opposition to soul or spirit as the
expression of the Good Principle. The Manichean philosophy of Evil, a
product of the early Christian centuries, has been perhaps the most
notable alternative or rival system encountered by the theistic philosophy
of Evil; for, notwithstanding the fantastic character of its conceptions
Manicheism has reappeared and reasserted itself repeatedly in after ages,
notably in the Middle Ages. Its prevalence has probably been due partly to
the concreteness of its conceptions and partly to a certain analogy which
they bear towards the conception of Satan and the fallen angels in
Christian theology. In both cases there is the idea of conflict, strife,
active and irreconcilable opposition, between the powers of good and the
powers of evil. But there the analogy ends. While in Christian theology
the powers of evil are presented as essentially subject to the Divine
Omnipotence, in Manicheism the _Evil Principle_, the _Summum Malum_, is
presented as a supreme, self-existent principle, essentially independent
of, as well as antagonistic to, the Divine Being, the _Summum Bonum_.
Since there is evil in the world, and since good cannot be the cause of
evil—so the Manicheans argue—there must be an essentially Evil First
Principle which is the primary source of all the evil in the universe,
just as there is an essentially Good First Principle which is the source
of all its good. Everything in the world—and especially man himself,
composed of matter and spirit—is the expression and the theatre of the
essential conflict which is being ever waged between the Good and the Evil
Principle. Everywhere throughout the universe we find this dualism:
between spirit and matter, light and darkness, order and disorder, etc.

From all that has been said in the preceding paragraphs regarding the
nature and causes of good and evil the errors of the Manichean system will
be apparent. Its fundamental error is the conception of evil as a positive
entity. Evil is not a positive entity but a privation. And this being so,
its occurrence does not demand a positive efficient cause. It can be
explained and accounted for by deficiency or failure in causes that are
good in so far forth as they are operative, but which have not all the
goodness their nature demands. And we have seen how this failure of
created causes is permitted by the First Cause, and is not incompatible
with His Infinite Goodness.

Besides, the Manichean conception of an intrinsically evil cause, a cause
that could produce only evil, is a contradiction in terms. The operation
of an efficient cause must have a positive term: in so far as the term is
positive it is good: and therefore its cause cannot have been totally
evil, but must have been in some degree good. The crucial point in the
whole debate is this, that we cannot conceive evil as a positive entity.
By doing so we render reality unintelligible; we destroy the fundamental
ground of any possible distinction between good and evil, thus rendering
both alike inconceivable. Each is correlative to the other; we cannot
understand the one without the other. If, therefore, goodness is an aspect
of real being, and identical with reality, evil must be a negation of
reality, and cannot be made intelligible otherwise.

Finally, the Manichean conception of two Supreme, Self-Existent,
Independent First Principles is obviously self-contradictory. As is shown
in Natural Theology, Being that is absolutely Supreme, Self-Existent and
Necessary, must by Its very nature be unique: there could not be two such
Beings.





CHAPTER VII. REALITY AND THE BEAUTIFUL.


 . THE CONCEPT OF THE BEAUTIFUL FROM THE STANDPOINT OF EXPERIENCE.—Truth
and Goodness characterize reality as related to intellect and to will.
Intimately connected with these notions is that of _the beautiful_,( )
which we must now briefly analyse. The fine arts have for their common
object the expression of the beautiful; and the department of philosophy
which studies these, the philosophy of the beautiful, is generally
described as _Esthetics_.( )

Like the terms “true” and “good,” the term “beautiful” (καλόν; _pulchrum_,
_beau_, _schön_, etc.) is familiar to all. To reach a definition of it let
us question experience. What do men commonly mean when, face to face with
some object or event, they say “That is _beautiful_”? They give expression
to this sentiment in the presence of a natural object such as a landscape
revealing mountain and valley, lake and river and plain and woodland,
glowing in the golden glow of the setting sun; or in contemplating some
work of art—painting, sculpture, architecture, music: the _Sistine
Madonna_, the _Moses_ of Michael Angelo, the Cathedral of _Notre Dame_, a
symphony of Beethoven; or some literary masterpiece: Shakespeare’s
_Macbeth_, or Dante’s _Divina Commedia_, or Newman’s _Apologia_, or
Kickham’s _Knocknagow_. There are other things the sight of which arouses
no such sentiment, but leaves us indifferent; and others again, the sight
of which arouses a contrary sentiment, to which we give expression by
designating them as “commonplace,” “vulgar,” “ugly”. The sentiment in
question is one of _pleasure_ and _approval_, or of _displeasure_ and
_disapproval_.

Hence the first fact to note is that _the beautiful pleases us_, _affects
us agreeably_, while the commonplace or the ugly leaves us indifferent or
_displeases us_, _affects us disagreeably_.

But the _good_ pleases us and affects us agreeably. Is the beautiful,
then, identical with the good? No; the really beautiful is indeed always
good; but not everything that is good is beautiful; nor is the pleasure
aroused by the good identical with that aroused by the beautiful. Whatever
gratifies the lower sense appetites and causes organic pleasure is
good—_bonum delectabile_—but is not deemed beautiful. Eating and drinking,
resting and sleeping, indulging the senses of touch, taste and smell, are
indeed pleasure-giving, but they have no association with the beautiful.
Again, the deformed child may be the object of the mother’s special love.
But the pleasure thus derived from the good, as the object of appetite,
desire, delight, is not esthetic pleasure. If we examine the latter, the
pleasure caused by the beautiful, we shall find that it is invariably a
pleasure peculiar to _knowledge_, to apprehension, perception,
imagination, contemplation. Hence in the domain of the senses we designate
as “beautiful” only what can be apprehended by the two higher senses,
seeing and hearing, which approximate most closely to intellect, and
which, through the imagination, furnish data for _contemplation_ to the
intellect.( ) This brings us to St. Thomas’s definition: _Pulchra sunt
quæ visa placent_: those things are beautiful whose vision pleases
us,—where vision is to be understood in the wide sense of apprehension,
contemplation.( ) The owner of a beautiful demesne, or of an art
treasure, may derive pleasure from his sense of proprietorship; but this
is distinct from the esthetic pleasure that may be derived by others, no
less than by himself, from the mere contemplation of those objects.
Esthetic pleasure is disinterested: it springs from the mere
_contemplation_ of an object as beautiful; whereas the pleasure that
springs from the object as good is an interested pleasure, a pleasure of
_possession_. No doubt the beautiful is really identical with the good,
though logically distinct from the latter.( ) The _orderliness_ which we
shall see to be the chief objective factor of beauty, is itself a
perfection of the object, and as such is good and desirable. Hence the
beautiful can be an object of interested desire, but only under the aspect
of goodness. Under the aspect of beauty the object can excite only the
disinterested esthetic pleasure of contemplation.

But if esthetic pleasure is derived from contemplation, is not this
identifying the beautiful with the true, and supplanting art by science?
Again the consequence is inadmissible; for not every pleasure peculiar to
knowledge is esthetic. There is a pleasure in seeking and discovering
truth, the pleasure which gratifies the scholar and the scientist: the
pleasure of the philologist in tracing roots and paradigms, of the chemist
in analysing unsavoury materials, of the anatomist in exploring the
structure of organisms _post mortem_. But these things are not
“beautiful”. The really beautiful is indeed always true, but it cannot
well be maintained that all truths are beautiful. That two and two are
four is a truth, but in what intelligible sense could it be said to be
beautiful?

But besides the scientific pleasure of seeking and discovering truth,
there is the pleasure which comes from contemplating the object known. The
aim of the scientist or scholar is _to discover truth_; that of the artist
is, through knowledge to derive complacency from _contemplating the thing
known_. The scientist or scholar may be also an artist, or _vice versa_;
but the scientist’s pleasure proper lies exclusively in discovering truth,
whereas that of the artist lies in contemplating something apprehended,
imagined, conceived. The artist is not concerned as to whether what he
apprehends is real or imaginary, certain or conjectural, but only as to
whether or how far the contemplation of it will arouse emotions of
pleasure, admiration, enthusiasm; while the scientist’s supreme concern is
to know things, to see them as they are. The beautiful, then, is always
true, either as actual or as ideal; but the true is beautiful only when it
so reveals itself as to arouse in us the desire to see or hear it, to
consider it, to dwell and rest in the contemplation of it.

Let us accept, then, the _a posteriori_ definition of the beautiful as
_that which it is pleasing to contemplate_; and before inquiring what
precisely is it, on the side of the object, that makes the latter
agreeable to contemplate, let us examine the subjective factors and
conditions of esthetic experience.

 . THE ESTHETIC SENTIMENT. APPREHENSION OF THE BEAUTIFUL.—We have seen
that both the appetitive and the cognitive faculties are involved in the
experience of the beautiful. Contemplation implies cognition; while the
feeling of pleasure, complacency, satisfaction, delight, indicates the
operation of appetite or will. Now the notion of the beautiful, like all
our notions, has its origin in sense experience; but it is itself
suprasensible for it is reached by abstraction, and this is above the
power of sense faculties. While the senses and imagination apprehend
beautiful objects the intellect attains to that which makes these objects
beautiful, to the _ratio pulchri_ that is in them. No doubt, the
perception or imagination of beautiful things, in nature or in art,
produces as its natural concomitant, a feeling of sensible pleasure. To
hear sweet music, to gaze on the brilliant variety of colours in a
gorgeous pageant, to inhale delicious perfumes, to taste savoury
dishes—all such experiences gratify the senses. But the feeling of such
sensible pleasure is quite distinct from the esthetic enjoyment which
accompanies the apprehension of the beautiful; though it is very often
confounded with the latter. Such _sentient_ states of agreeable feeling
are mainly _passive_, organic, physiological; while esthetic enjoyment,
the appreciation of the beautiful, is eminently _active_. It implies the
operation of a suprasensible faculty, the _intelligence_; it accompanies
the reaction of the latter faculty to some appropriate objective stimulus
of the suprasensible, intelligible order, to some “idea” embodied in the
object of sense.( )

The error of confounding esthetic enjoyment with mere organic sense
pleasure is characteristic of all sensist and materialist philosophies. A
feeling of sensible gratification always, no doubt, accompanies our
apprehension and enjoyment of the beautiful; for just as man is not a
merely sentient being so neither is he a pure intelligence. Beauty reaches
him through the senses; in order that an object be beautiful for him, in
order that the contemplation of it may please him, it must be in harmony
with his whole _human_ nature, which is both sentient and intelligent; it
must, therefore, be agreeable to the senses and imagination as well as to
the intellect. “There is no painting,” writes M. Brunetière,( ) “but
should be above all a joy to the eye! no music but should be a delight for
the ear!” Otherwise we shall not apprehend in it the order, perfection,
harmony, adaptation to human nature, whereby we pronounce an object
beautiful and rejoice in the contemplation of it. And it is this
intellectual activity that is properly esthetic. “What makes us consider a
colour beautiful,” writes Bossuet,( ) is the secret judgment we
pronounce upon its adaptation to the eye which it pleases. Beautiful
sounds, songs, cadences, have a similar adaptation to the ear. To
apprehend this adaptation promptly and accurately is what is described as
having a good ear, though properly speaking this judgment should be
attributed to the intellect.

According to some the esthetic sentiment, the appreciation and enjoyment
of the beautiful, is an exclusively subjective experience, an emotional
state which has all its sources within the conscious subject, and which
has no real, extramental correlative in things. According to others beauty
is already in the extramental reality independently of any subjective
conditions, and has no mental factors in its constitution as an object of
experience. Both of these extreme views are erroneous. Esthetic pleasure,
like all pleasure, is the natural concomitant of the full, orderly, normal
exercise of the subject’s conscious activities. These activities are
called forth by, and exercised upon, some _object_. For esthetic pleasure
there must be in the object something the contemplation of which will
elicit such harmonious exercise of the faculties. Esthetic pleasure,
therefore, cannot be purely subjective: there must be an objective factor
in its realization. But on the other hand this objective factor cannot
provoke esthetic enjoyment independently of the dispositions of the
subject. It must be in harmony with those dispositions—cognitive,
appetitive, affective, emotional, temperamental—in order to evoke such a
mental view of the object that the contemplation of the latter will cause
esthetic pleasure. And it is precisely because these dispositions, which
are so variable from one individual to another, tinge and colour the
mental view, while this in turn determines the quality of the esthetic
judgment and feeling, that people disagree and dispute interminably about
questions of beauty in art and nature. Herein beauty differs from truth.
No doubt people dispute about the latter also; but at all events they
recognize its objective character and the propriety of an appeal to the
independent, impersonal standard of evidence. Not so, however, in regard
to beauty: _De gustibus non est disputandum_: there is no disputing about
tastes. The perception of beauty, the judgment that something is or is not
beautiful, is the product of an act of _taste_, _i.e._ of the individual’s
intelligence affected by numerous concrete personal dispositions both of
the sentient and of the spiritual order, not only cognitive and appetitive
but temperamental and emotional. Moreover, besides this variety in
subjective dispositions, we have to bear in mind the effects of artistic
culture, of educating the taste. The eye and the ear, which are the two
main channels of data for the intellect, can be made by training more
delicate and exacting, so that the same level of esthetic appreciation can
be maintained only by a constantly increasing measure of artistic
stimulation. Finally, apart from all that a beautiful object _directly
conveys_ to us for contemplation, there is something more which it may
_indirectly suggest_: it arouses a distinct activity of the imagination
whereby we fill up, in our own individual degree and according to our own
interpretation, what has not been actually supplied in it by nature or
art.

All those influences account sufficiently for the subjectivity and
variability of the esthetic sentiment, for diversity of artistic tastes
among individuals, for the transitions of fashion in art from epoch to
epoch and from race to race. But it must not be concluded that the
subjective factors in the constitution of the beautiful are wholly
changeable. Since human nature is fundamentally the same in all men there
ought to be a fund of esthetic judgments and pleasures common to all;
there ought to be in nature and in art some things which are recognized
and enjoyed as beautiful by all. And there are such. In matters _of
detail_ the maxim holds: _De gustibus non disputandum_. But there are
fundamental esthetic judgments for which it does not hold. Since men have
a common nature, and since, as we shall see presently, there are
recognizable and stable objective factors to determine esthetic judgments,
there is a legitimate foundation on which to discuss and establish some
esthetic canons of universal validity.

 . OBJECTIVE FACTORS IN THE CONSTITUTION OF THE BEAUTIFUL.—“Ask the
artist,” writes St. Augustine,( ) “whether beautiful things are
beautiful because they please us, or rather please us because they are
beautiful, and he will reply unhesitatingly that they please us because
they are beautiful.” What, then is it that makes them beautiful, and so
causes the esthetic pleasure we experience in contemplating them? In order
that an object produce pleasure of any sort in a conscious being it must
evoke the exercise of this being’s faculties; for the conscious condition
which we describe as pleasure is always a reflex of conscious activity.
Furthermore, this activity must be _full_ and _intense_ and
_well-ordered_: if it be excessive or defective, if it be ill-regulated,
wrongly distributed among the faculties, it will not have pleasure for its
reflex, but either indifference or pain.

Hence the object which evokes the esthetic pleasure of contemplation must
in the _first_ place be _complete_ or _perfect_ of its kind ( ). The
truncated statue, the stunted oak, the deformed animal, the crippled human
being, are not beautiful. They are wanting in the integrity due to their
nature.

But this is not enough. To be beautiful, the object must in the _second_
place have a certain _largeness_ or amplitude, a certain greatness or
power, whereby it can act _energetically_ on our cognitive faculties and
stimulate them to _vigorous_ action. The little, the trifling, the
commonplace, the insignificant, evokes no feeling of admiration. The sight
of a small pasture-field leaves us indifferent; but the vision of vast
expanses of meadow and cornfield and woodland exhilarates us. A collection
of petty hillocks is uninteresting, while the towering snow-clad Alps are
magnificent. The multiplication table elicits no emotion; but the
triumphant discovery and proof of some new truth in science, some
far-reaching theorem that opens up new vistas of research or sheds a new
light on long familiar facts, may fill the mind with ecstasies of pure
esthetic enjoyment.( ) There is no moral beauty in helping up a child
that has stumbled and fallen in the mud, but there is in risking one’s
life to save the child from burning or drowning. There must, then, be in
the object a certain largeness which will secure energy of appeal to our
cognitive faculties; but this energy must not be excessive, it must not
dazzle, it must be in proportion to the capacity of our faculties.( )

A _third_ requisite for beauty is that the object be in itself _duly
proportioned_, _orderly_, _well arranged_. _Order_ generally may be
defined as right or proper arrangement. We can see in things a twofold
order, _dynamic_, or that of _subordination_, and _static_, or that of
_co-ordination_: the right arrangement of means towards ends, and the
right arrangement of parts in a whole, or members in a system. The former
indicates the influence of _final_ causes and expresses primarily the
_goodness_ of things. The latter is determined by the _formal_ causes of
things and expresses primarily their _beauty_. The order essential to
beauty consists in this, that the manifold and distinct things or acts
which contribute to it must form one whole. Hence order has been defined
as _unity in variety_: _unitas in varietate_; variety being the material
cause, and unity the formal cause, of order. But we can apprehend unity in
a variety of things only on condition that they are _arranged_, _i.e._
that they show forth clearly to the mind a set of mutual relations which
can be easily grasped. Why is it that things mutually related to one
another in one way make up what we declare to be a chaotic jumble, while
if related in another way we declare them to be orderly? Because unless
these relations present themselves in a certain way they will fail to
unify the manifold for us. We have an intellectual intuition of the
numerical series; and of _proportion_, which is equality of numerical
relations. In the domains of magnitude and multitude the mind naturally
seeks to detect these proportions. So also in the domains of sensible
qualities, such as sounds and colours, we have an analogous intuition of a
qualitative series, and we naturally try to detect _harmony_, which is the
gradation of qualitative relations in this series. The detection of
_proportion_ and _harmony_ in a _variety_ of things pleases us, because we
are thus enabled to grasp the manifold as exhibiting _unity_; while the
absence of these elements leaves us with the dissatisfied feeling of
something wanting. Whether this be because order in things is the
expression of an intelligent will, of purpose and design, and therefore
calls forth our intelligent and volitional activity, with its consequent
and connatural feeling of satisfaction, we do not inquire here. But
certain it is that order is essential to beauty, that esthetic pleasure
springs only from the contemplation of proportion and harmony, which give
unity to variety.( ) And the explanation of this is not far to seek. For
the full and vigorous exercise of contemplative activity we need objective
variety. Whatever lacks variety, and stimulates us in one uniform manner,
becomes monotonous and causes _ennui_. While on the other hand mere
multiplicity distracts the mind, disperses and weakens attention, and
begets fatigue. We must, therefore, have variety, but variety combined
with the unity that will concentrate and sustain attention, and thus call
forth the highest and keenest energy of intellectual activity. Hence the
function of rhythm in music, poetry and oratory; of composition and
perspective in painting; of design in architecture.

The more perfect the relations are which constitute order, the more
_clearly_ will the unity of the object _shine forth_; hence the more fully
and easily will it be grasped, and the more intense the esthetic pleasure
of contemplating it.

St. Thomas thus sums up the objective conditions of the beautiful:
_integrity_ or _perfection_, _proportion_ or _harmony_, and _clarity_ or
_splendour_.( )

 . SOME DEFINITIONS OF THE BEAUTIFUL.—An object is beautiful when its
contemplation pleases us; and this takes place when the object, complete
and entire in itself, possesses that order, harmony, proportion of parts,
which will call forth the full and vigorous exercise of our cognitive
activity. All this amounts to saying that the beauty of a thing is the
_revelation or manifestation of its natural perfection_.( ) Perfection
is thus the _foundation_ of beauty; the showing forth of this perfection
is what constitutes beauty _formally_. Every real being has a nature which
constitutes it, and activities whereby it tends to realize the purpose of
its existence. Now the perfection of any nature is manifested by the
proportion of its constitutive parts and by the harmony of all its
activities. Hence we see that order is essential to beauty because order
shows forth the perfection of the beautiful. An object is beautiful in the
degree in which the proportion of its parts and the harmony of its
activities show forth the perfection of its nature.

Thus, starting with the subjective, _a posteriori_ definition of beauty
from its effect: _beauty is that whose contemplation pleases us_—we have
passed to the objective and natural definition of beauty by its
properties: _beauty is the evident integrity, order, proportion and
harmony, of an object_—and thence to what we may call the _a priori_ or
synthetic definition, which emphasizes the perfection revealed by the
static and dynamic order of the thing: _the beauty of an object is the
manifestation of its natural perfection by the proportion of its parts and
the harmony of its activities_.( )


    A few samples of the many definitions that have been set forth by
    various authors will not be without interest. Vallet( ) defines
    beauty as _the splendour of perfection_. Other authors define it
    as _the splendour of order_. These definitions sacrifice clearness
    to brevity. Beauty is _the splendour of the true_. This
    definition, commonly attributed to Plato, but without reason, is
    inadequate and ambiguous. Cousin( ) defines beauty as _unity in
    variety_. This leaves out an essential element, the _clarity_ or
    _clear manifestation_ of order. Kant defines beauty as _the power
    an object possesses of giving free play to the imagination without
    transgressing the laws of the understanding_.( ) This definition
    emphasizes the necessary harmony of the beautiful with our
    cognitive faculties, and the fact that the esthetic sentiment is
    not capricious but subject to the laws of the understanding. It
    is, however, inadequate, in as much as it omits all reference to
    the objective factors of beauty.


 . CLASSIFICATIONS. THE BEAUTIFUL IN NATURE.—All real beauty is either
_natural_ or _artificial_. Natural beauty is that which characterizes what
we call the “works of Nature” or the “works of God”. Artificial beauty is
the beauty of “works of art”.

Again, just as we can distinguish the _real_ beauty of the latter from the
_ideal_ beauty which the human artist conceives in his mind as its
archetype and exemplar cause, so, too, we can distinguish between the real
beauty of natural things and the ideal beauty of their uncreated
archetypes in the Mind of the Divine Artist.

We know that the beauty of the human artist’s ideal is superior to, and
never fully realized in, that of the actually achieved product of his art.
Is the same true of the natural beauty of God’s works? That the works of
God in general are beautiful cannot be denied; His Wisdom “spreads beauty
abroad” throughout His works; He arranges all things according to weight
and number and measure:_cum pondere, numero et mensura_; His Providence
disposes all things strongly and sweetly: _fortiter et suaviter_. But
while creatures, by revealing their own beauty, reflect the Uncreated
beauty of God in the precise degree which He has willed from all eternity,
it cannot be said that they all realize the beauty of their Divine
Exemplars according to His primary purpose and decree. Since there is
physical and moral evil in the universe, since there are beings which fail
to realize their ends, to attain to the perfection of their natures, it
follows that these beings are not beautiful. In so far forth as they have
real being, and the goodness or perfection which is identical with their
reality, it may be admitted that all real beings are _fundamentally_
beautiful; for goodness or perfection is the foundation of beauty.( )
But in so far as they fail to realize the perfection due to their natures
they lack even the foundation of beauty. Furthermore, in order that a
thing which has the full perfection due to its nature be _formally_
beautiful, it must actually show forth by the clearness of its proportions
and the harmony of its activities the fulness of its natural perfections.
But there is no need to prove that this is not universally verified in
nature—or in art either. And hence we must infer that formal beauty is not
a transcendental attribute of reality.( )

Real beauty may be further divided into _material_ or _sensible_ or
_physical_, and _intellectual_ or _spiritual_. The former reveals itself
to hearing, seeing and imagination; the latter can be apprehended only by
intellect; but intellect depends for all its objects on the data of the
imagination. The beauty of spiritual realities is of course of a higher,
nobler and more excellent order than that of the realities of sense. The
spiritual beauty which falls directly within human experience is that of
the human spirit itself; from the soul and its experiences we can rise to
an apprehension—analogical and inadequate—of the Beauty of the Infinite
Being. In the soul itself we can distinguish two sources of beauty: what
we may call its _natural_ endowments such as intellect and will, and its
_moral_ dispositions, its perfections and excellences as a free,
intelligent, moral agent—its _virtues_. Beauty of soul, especially the
moral beauty of the virtuous soul, is incomparably more precious than
beauty of body. The latter, of course, like all real beauty in God’s
creation, has its proper dignity as an expression and revelation, however
faint and inadequate, of the Uncreated Beauty of the Deity. But inasmuch
as it is so inferior to the moral beauty proper to man, in itself so frail
and evanescent, in its influence on human passions so dangerous to virtue,
we can understand why in the Proverbs of Solomon it is proclaimed to be
vain and deceitful in contrast with the moral beauty of fearing the Lord:
_Fallax gratia et vana est pulchritudo; mulier timens dominum ipsa
laudabitur_.( )

 . THE BEAUTIFUL IN ART. SCOPE AND FUNCTION OF THE FINE ARTS.—The
expression of beauty is the aim of the fine arts. Art in general is “the
proper conception of a work to be accomplished”: “ars nihil aliud est quam
recta ratio aliquorum operum faciendorum”.( ) While the _mechanical_
arts aim at the production of things useful, the _fine_ arts aim at the
production of things beautiful, _i.e._ of works which by their order,
symmetry, harmony, splendour, etc., will give such apt expression to human
ideals of natural beauty as to elicit esthetic enjoyment in the highest
possible degree. The artist, then, must be a faithful student and admirer
of all natural beauty; not indeed to aim at exact reproduction or
imitation of the latter; but to draw therefrom his inspiration and ideals.
Even the most beautiful things of nature express only inadequately the
ideal beauty which the human mind may gather from the study of them. This
ideal is what the artist is ever struggling to express, with the
ever-present and tormenting consciousness that the achievement of his
highest effort will fall immeasurably short of giving adequate expression
to it.

If each of the things of nature were so wholly simple and intelligible as
to present the same ideal type of beauty to all, and leave no room for
individual differences of interpretation, there would be no variety in the
products of artistic genius, except indeed what would result from perfect
or imperfect execution. But the things of nature are complex, and in part
at least enigmatical; they present different aspects to different minds
and suggest a variety of interpretations; they leave large scope to the
play of the imagination both as to conception of the ideal itself and as
to the arrangement and manipulation of the sensible materials in which the
ideal is to find expression. By means of these two functions, _conception_
and _expression_, the genius of the artist seeks to interpret and realize
for us ideal types of natural beauty.

The qualities of a work of art, the conditions it must fulfil, are those
already enumerated in regard to beauty generally. It must have unity,
order, proportion of parts; it must be true to nature, not in the sense of
a mere copy, but in the sense of drawing its inspiration from nature, and
so helping us to understand and appreciate the beauties of nature; it must
display a power and clearness of expression adjusted to the capacity of
the normal mind.

We may add—as indicating the connexion of art with morality—that the work
of art must not be such as to excite disapproval or cause pain by shocking
any normal faculty, or running counter to any fundamental belief,
sympathy, sentiment or feeling, of the human mind. The contemplation of
the really beautiful, whether in nature or in art, ought _per se_ to have
an elevating, ennobling, refining influence on the mind. But the beautiful
is not the good; nor does the cultivation of the fine arts necessarily
enrich the mind _morally_. From the ethical point of view art is one of
those indifferent things which the will can make morally good or morally
evil. Since man is a moral being, no human interest can fall outside the
moral sphere, or claim independence of the moral law; and art is a human
interest. Neither the creator, nor the critic, nor the student of a work
of art can claim that the latter, simply because it is a work of art, is
neither morally good nor morally bad; or that he in his special relation
to it is independent of the moral law.

Under the specious plea that science in seeking truth is neither
positively moral nor positively immoral, but abstracts altogether from the
quality of morality, it is sometimes claimed that, _a pari_, art in its
pursuit of the beautiful should be held to abstract from moral
distinctions and have no concern for moral good or evil. But in the first
place, though science as such seeks simply the true, and in this sense
abstracts from the good and the evil, still the man of science both in
acquiring and communicating truth is bound by the moral law: he may not,
under the plea that he is learning or teaching truth, do anything _morally
wrong_, anything that will _forfeit or endanger moral rectitude_, whether
in himself or in others. And in the second place, owing to the different
relations of truth and beauty to moral goodness, we must deny the parity
on which the argument rests. Truth appeals to the reason alone; beauty
appeals to the senses, the heart, the will, the passions and emotions:
“_Pulchrum trahit ad se desiderium_”. The scientist expresses truth in
abstract laws, definitions and formulas: a law of chemistry will help the
farmer to fertilize the soil, or the anarchist to assassinate sovereigns.
But the artist expresses beauty in concrete forms calculated to provoke
emotions of esthetic enjoyment from the contemplation of them. Now there
are other pleasure-giving emotions, sensual and carnal emotions, the
indiscriminate excitement and unbridled indulgence of which the moral law
condemns as evil; and if a work of art be of such a kind that it is
directly calculated to excite them, the artist stands condemned by the
moral law, and that even though his aim may have been to give expression
to beauty and call forth esthetic enjoyment merely. If the preponderating
influence of the artist’s work on the normal human individual be a
solicitation of the latter’s nature towards what is evil, what is opposed
to his real perfection, his moral progress, his last end, then that
artist’s work is not a work of art or truly beautiful. The net result of
its appeal being evil and unhealthy, it cannot be itself a thing of
beauty.


    “Art for art’s sake” is a cry that is now no longer novel. Taken
    literally it is unmeaning, for art is a means to an end—the
    expression of the beautiful; and a means as such cannot be “for
    its own sake”. But it may signify that art should subserve no
    _extrinsic_ purpose, professional or utilitarian; that it should
    be disinterested; that the artist must aim at the conception and
    expression of the beautiful through a disinterested admiration and
    enthusiasm for the beautiful. In this sense the formula expresses
    a principle which is absolutely true, and which asserts the noble
    mission of the artist to mankind. But the formula is also commonly
    understood to claim the emancipation of the artist from the bonds
    of morality, and his freedom to conceive and express beauty in
    whatever forms he pleases, whether these may aid men to virtue or
    solicit them to vice. This is the pernicious error to which we
    have just referred. And we may now add that this erroneous
    contention is not only ethically but also _artistically_ unsound.
    For surely art ought to be based on truth: the artist should
    understand human nature, to which his work appeals: he should not
    regard as truly beautiful a work the contemplation of which will
    produce a _discord_ in the soul, which will _disturb the right
    order_ of the soul’s activities, which will solicit the lower
    faculties to revolt against the higher; and this is what takes
    place when the artist ignores moral rectitude in the pursuit of
    his art: by despising the former he is false to the latter. He
    fails to realize that the work of art must be judged not merely in
    relation to the total _amount_ of pleasure it may cause in those
    who contemplate it, but also in relation to the _quality_ of this
    pleasure; and not merely in relation to esthetic pleasure, but in
    relation to the total effect, the whole concrete influence of the
    work on all the mental faculties. He fails to see that if this
    total influence is evil, the work that causes it cannot be good
    nor therefore really beautiful.

    Are we to conclude, then, that the artist is bound to aim
    positively and always at producing a _good moral effect_ through
    his work? By no means. Esthetic pleasure is, as we have said,
    indifferent. The pursuit of it, through the conception and
    expression of the beautiful, is the proper and intrinsic end of
    the fine arts, and is in itself legitimate so long as it does not
    run counter to the moral law. It has no need to run counter to the
    moral law, nor can it do so without defeating its own end. Outside
    its proper limits art ceases to be art; within its proper limits
    it has a noble and elevating mission; and it can serve indirectly
    but powerfully the interests of truth and goodness by helping men
    to substitute for the lower and grosser pleasures of sense the
    higher and purer esthetic pleasures which issue from the
    disinterested contemplation of the beautiful.





CHAPTER VIII. THE CATEGORIES OF BEING. SUBSTANCE AND ACCIDENT.


 . THE CONCEPTION OF ULTIMATE CATEGORIES.—Having examined so far the
notion of real being itself, which is the proper subject-matter of
ontology, and those widest or transcendental notions which are coextensive
with that of reality, we must next inquire into the various modes in which
we find real being expressed, determined, actualized, as it falls within
our experience. In other words, we must examine the _highest categories of
being_, the _suprema genera entis_. Considered from the point of view of
the logical arrangement of our concepts, each of these categories reveals
itself as a primary and immediate limitation of the extension of the
transcendental concept of real being itself. Each is ultimately distinct
from the others in the sense that no two of them can be brought under any
other as a genus, nor can we discover any intermediate notion between any
one of them and the notion of being itself. The latter notion is not
properly a genus of which they would be species, nor can it be predicated
univocally of any two or more of them ( ). Each is itself an ultimate
genus, a _genus supremum_.

By using these notions as predicates of our judgments we are enabled to
interpret things, to obtain a genuine if inadequate insight into reality;
for we assume as established in the _Theory of Knowledge_ that all our
universal concepts have real and objective validity, that they give us
real knowledge of the nature of those individual things which form the
data of our sense experience. Hence the study of the categories, which is
for Logic a classification of our widest concepts, become for Metaphysics
an inquiry into the modes which characterize real being.( ) By
determining what these modes are, by studying their characteristics, by
tracing them through the data of experience, we advance in our knowledge
of reality.

The most divergent views have prevailed among philosophers both as to what
a category is or signifies, and as to what or how many the really ultimate
categories are. Is a category, such as substance, or quality, or quantity,
a mode of real being revealed to the knowing mind, as most ancient and
medieval philosophers thought, with Aristotle and St. Thomas? or is it a
mental mode imposed on reality by the knowing mind, as many modern
philosophers have thought, with Kant and after him? It is for the Theory
of Knowledge to examine this alternative; nor shall we discuss it here
except very incidentally: for we shall assume as true the broad
affirmative answer to the first alternative. That is to say, we shall hold
that the mind is able to see, in the categories generally, modes of
reality; rejecting the sceptical conclusions of Kantism in regard to the
power of the Speculative Reason, and the principles which lead to such
conclusions.

As to the number and classification of the ultimate categories, this is
obviously a question which cannot be settled _a priori_ by any such purely
deductive analysis of the concept of being as Hegel seems to have
attempted; but only _a posteriori_, _i.e._ by an analysis of experience in
its broadest sense as including Matter and Spirit, Nature and Mind, Object
and Subject of Thought, and even the Process of Thought itself. Moreover
it is not surprising that with the progress of philosophical reflection,
certain categories should have been studied more deeply at certain epochs
than ever previously, that they should have been “discovered” so to speak,
not of course in the sense that the human mind had not been previously in
possession of them, but in the sense that because of closer study they
furnished the mind with a richer and fuller power of “explaining” things.
It is natural, too, that historians of philosophy, intent on tracing the
movement of philosophic thought, should be inclined to over-emphasize the
_relativity_ of the categories, as regards their “explaining” value—their
relativity to the general mentality of a certain epoch or period.( ) But
there is danger here of confounding certain large _hypothetical
conceptions_, which are found to yield valuable results at a certain stage
in the progress of the sciences,( ) with the categories proper of real
being. If the mind of man is of the same nature in all men, if it
contemplates the same universe, if it is capable of reaching truth about
this universe—real truth which is immutable,—then the modes of being which
it apprehends in the universe, and by conceiving which it interprets the
latter, must be in the universe as known, and must be there immutably.
Nowhere do we find this more clearly illustrated than in the futility of
the numerous attempts of modern philosophers to deny the reality of the
category of _substance_, and to give an intelligible interpretation of
experience without the aid of this category. We shall see that as a matter
of fact it is impossible to deny _in thought_ the reality of substance, or
to think at all without it, however philosophers may have denied it _in
language_,—or thought that they denied it when they only rejected some
erroneous or indefensible meaning of the term.

 . THE ARISTOTELIAN CATEGORIES.—The first palpable distinction we observe
in the data of experience is that between _substance_ and _accident_. “We
might naturally ask,” writes Aristotle,( ) “whether what is signified by
such terms as _walking_, _sitting_, _feeling well_, is a being (or
reality).... And we might be inclined to doubt it, for no single one of
such acts _exists by itself_ (καθ᾽ αὐτὸ πεφυκός), no one of them is
separable from _substance_ (οὐσία); it is rather to _him who_ walks, or
sits, or feels well, that we give the name of _being_. That which is a
being _in the primary meaning of this term_, a being _simply and
absolutely_, and not merely a being _in a certain sense_, or with a
qualification, is substance—ὡστε τὸ πρώτως ὂν καὶ οὐ τὶ ὂν ἀλλ᾽ ὂν ἁπλῶς ἡ
οὐσία ἂν εἴν.”( ) But manifestly, though substances, or what in ordinary
language we call “persons” and “things”—men, animals, plants, minerals—are
real beings in the fullest sense, nevertheless sitting, walking, thinking,
willing, and actions generally, are also undoubtedly realities; so too are
states and qualities; and shape, size, posture, etc. And yet we do not
find any of these latter actually existing in themselves like substances,
but only dependently on substances—on “persons” or “things” that think or
walk or act, or are large or small, hot or cold, or have some shape or
quality. They are all _accidents_, in contradistinction to substance.

It is far easier to distinguish between accidents and substance than to
give an exhaustive list of the ultimate and irreducible classes of the
former. Aristotle enumerates _nine_: Quantity (ποσόν), Quality (ποῖον),
Relation (πρὸς τι), Action (ποιέιν), Passion (πάσχειν), Where (ποῦ), When
(ποτέ), Posture (κεῖσθαι), External Condition or State (ἔχειν). Much has
been said for and against the exhaustive character of this classification.
Scholastics generally have defended and adopted it. St. Thomas gives the
following reasoned analysis of it:( ) Since accidents may be
distinguished by their relations to substance, we see that some affect
substances intrinsically, others extrinsically; and in the former case,
either absolutely or relatively: if relatively we have the category of
_relation_; if absolutely we have either _quantity_ or _quality_ according
as the accident affects the substance by reason of the matter, or the
form, of the latter. What affects and denominates a substance
extrinsically does so either as a cause, or as a measure, or otherwise. If
as a cause, the substance is either _suffering_ action, or _acting_
itself; if as a measure, it denominates the subject as in _time_, or in
_place_, or in regard to the relative position of its parts, its
_posture_, in the place which it occupies. Finally, if the accident
affects the substance extrinsically, though not as cause or as measure,
but only as characterizing its external condition and immediate
surroundings, as when we describe a man as clothed or armed, we have the
category of _condition_.

It might be said that all this is more ingenious than convincing; but it
is easier to criticize Aristotle’s list than to suggest a better one. In
addition to what we have said of it elsewhere,( ) a few remarks will be
sufficient in the present context.

Some of the categories, as being of lesser importance, we may treat
incidentally when dealing with the more important ones. _Ubi_, _Quando_,
and _Situs_, together with the analysis of our notions of Space and Time,
fall naturally into the general doctrine of _Quantity_. The final
category, ἔχειν, however interpreted,( ) may be referred to _Quality_,
_Quantity_, or _Relation_.

A more serious point for consideration is the fact, generally admitted by
scholastics,( ) that one and the same real accident may belong to
different categories if we regard it from different standpoints. _Actio_
and _passio_ are one and the same _motus_ or change, regarded in relation
to the agent and to the effect, respectively. _Place_, in regard to the
located body belongs to the category _ubi_, whereabouts; in regard to the
locating body it is an aspect of the latter’s _quantity_. _Relation_, as
we shall see, is probably not an entity really distinct from its
foundation—quality, quantity, or causality. The reason alleged for this
partial absence of real distinction between the Aristotelian categories is
that they were thought out primarily from a logical point of view—that of
predication.( ) And the reason is a satisfactory one, for real
distinction is not necessary for diversity of predication. Then, where
they are not really distinct entities these categories are at least
aspects so fundamentally distinct and mutually irreducible that each of
them is indeed a _summum genus_ immediately under the concept of being in
general.

It seems a bold claim to make for any scheme of categories, that it
exhausts all the known modes of reality. We often experience objects of
thought which seem at first sight incapable of reduction to any of
Aristotle’s _suprema genera_. But more mature reflection will always
enable us to find a place for them. In order that any extrinsic
denomination of a substance constitute a category distinct from those
enumerated, it must affect the substance _in some real_ way distinct from
any of those nine; and it must moreover _be not a mere complex or
aggregate_ of two or more of the latter. Hence denominations which objects
derive from the fact that they are terms of mental activities which are
really immanent, _actiones_ “_intentionales_,”—denominations such as
“being known,” “being loved,”—neither belong to the category of “_passio_”
proper, nor do they constitute any distinct category. They are _entia
rationis_, logical relations. Again, while efficient causation resolves
itself into the categories of _actio_ and _passio_, the causation of
final, formal and material causes cannot be referred to these categories,
but neither does it constitute any new category. The influence of a final
cause consists in nothing more than its being a good which is the term of
appetite or desire. The causation of the formal cause consists in its
formally constituting the effect: it is always either a substantial or an
accidental form, and so must be referred to the categories of substance,
or quality, or quantity. Similarly material causality consists in this
that the matter is a partial constitutive principle of the composite
being; and it therefore refers us to the category of substance. It may be
noted, too, that the ontological principles of a composite being—such as
primal matter and substantial form—since they are themselves not properly
“beings,” but only “principles of being,” are said to belong each to its
proper category, not formally but only referentially, not _formaliter_ but
only _reductivé_. Finally, the various properties that are assigned to
certain accidents themselves are either logical relations (such as “not
having a contrary” or “being a measure”), or real relations, or intrinsic
modes of the accident itself (as when a quality is said to have a certain
“intensity”); but in all cases where they are not mere logical entities
they will be found to come under one or other of the Aristotelian
categories.

The “real being” which is thus “determined” into the supreme modes or
categories of substance and accidents is, of course, “being” considered
_substantially_ as _essential_ (whether possible or actual), and not
merely being that is actually existent, _existential_ being, in the
_participial_ sense. Furthermore, it is primarily finite or created being
that is so determined. The Infinite Being is above the categories,
_super_-substantial. It is because substance is the most perfect of the
categories, and because the Infinite Being verifies in Himself in an
incomprehensibly perfect manner all the perfections of substance, that we
speak of Him as a substance: remembering always that these essentially
finite human concepts are to be predicated of Him only _analogically_ ( ,
 ).

It may be inquired whether “accident” is a genus which should be
predicated _univocally_ of the nine Aristotelian categories as species? or
is the concept of “accident” only _analogical_, so that these nine
categories would be each a _summum genus_ in the strict sense, _i.e._ an
ultimate and immediate determination of the concept of “being” itself? We
have seen already that the concept of “being” as applied to “substance”
and “accident” is analogical ( ). So, too, it is analogical as applied to
the various categories of accidents. For the characteristic note of
“accident,” that of “affecting, inhering in” a subject, can scarcely be
said to be verified “in the same way,” “univocally,” of the various kinds
of accidents; it is therefore more probably correct not to regard
“accident” as a genus proper, but to conceive each kind of accident as a
_summum genus_ coming immediately under the transcendental concept of
“being”.

 . THE PHENOMENIST ATTACK ON THE TRADITIONAL DOCTRINE OF
SUBSTANCE.—Passing now to the question of the existence and nature of
substances, and their relation to accidents, we shall find evidences of
misunderstandings to which many philosophical errors may be ascribed at
least in part. It is a fairly common contention that the distinction
between substance and accident is really a groundless distinction; that we
have experience merely of transient events or happenings, internal and
external, with relations of coexistence or sequence between them; that it
is an illusion to suppose, underlying these, an inert, abiding basis
called “substance”; that this can be at best but a useless name for each
of the collections of external and internal appearances which make up our
total experience of the outer world and of our own minds. This is the
general position of _phenomenists_. “What do you know of substance,” they
ask us, “except that it is an indeterminate and unknown something
underlying phenomena? And even if you could prove its existence, what
would it avail you, since in its nature it is, and must remain, unknown?
No doubt the mind naturally supposes this ‘something’ underlying
phenomena; but it is a mere mental fiction the reality of which cannot be
proved, and the nature of which is admitted, even by some who believe in
its real existence, to be unknowable.”

Now there can be no doubt about the supreme importance of this question:
all parties are pretty generally agreed that on the real or fictitious
character of substance the very existence of genuine metaphysics in the
traditional sense depends. And at first sight the possibility of such a
controversy as the present one seems very strange. “Is it credible,” asks
Mercier,( ) “that thinkers of the first order, like Hume, Mill, Spencer,
Kant, Wundt, Paulsen, Littré, Taine, should have failed to recognize the
substantial character of things, and of the _Ego_ or Self? Must they not
have seen that they were placing themselves in open revolt against sound
common sense? And on the other hand is it likely that the genius of
Aristotle could have been duped by the naïve illusion which phenomenists
must logically ascribe to him? Or that all those sincere and earnest
teachers who adopted and preserved in scholastic philosophy for centuries
the peripatetic distinction between substance and accidents should have
been all utterly astray in interpreting an elementary fact of common
sense?”

There must have been misunderstandings, possibly on both sides, and much
waste of argument in refuting chimeras. Let us endeavour to find out what
they are and how they gradually arose.

Phenomenism has had its origin in the _Idealism_ which confines the human
mind to a knowledge of its own states, proclaiming the unknowability of
any reality other than these; and in the _Positivism_ which admits the
reality only of that which falls directly within external and internal
sense experience. Descartes did not deny the substantiality of the soul,
nor even of bodies; but his idealist theory of knowledge rendered suspect
all information derived by his deductive, _a priori_ method of reasoning
from supposed innate ideas, regarding the nature and properties of bodies.
Locke rejected the innatism of Descartes, ascribing to sense experience a
positive rôle in the formation of our ideas, and proving conclusively that
we have no such intuitive and deductively derived knowledge of real
substances as Descartes contended for.( ) Locke himself did not deny the
existence of substances,( ) any more than Descartes. But unfortunately
he propounded the mistaken assumption of Idealism, that the mind can know
only its own states; and also the error of thinking that because we have
not an intuitive insight into the specific nature of individual substances
we can know nothing at all through any channel about their nature: and he
gathered from this latter error a general notion or definition of
substance which is a distinct departure from what Aristotle and the
medieval scholastics had traditionally understood by substance. For Locke
substance is merely a supposed, but unknown, support for accidents.( )
Setting out with these two notions—that all objects of knowledge must be
states or phases of mind, and that material substance is a supposed, but
unknown and unknowable, substratum of the qualities revealed to our minds
in the process of sense perception—it was easy for Berkeley to support by
plausible arguments his denial of the reality of any such things as
material substances. And it was just as easy, if somewhat more audacious,
on the part of Hume to argue quite logically that if the supposed but
unknowable substantial substratum of external sense phenomena is illusory,
so likewise is the supposed substantial _Ego_ which is thought to underlie
and support the internal phenomena of consciousness.

Hume’s rejection of substance is apparently complete and absolute, and is
so interpreted by many of his disciples. But a thorough-going phenomenism
is in reality impossible; no philosophers have ever succeeded in thinking
out an intelligible theory of things without the concepts of “matter,” and
“spirit,” and “things,” and the “Ego” or “Self,” however they may have
tried to dispense with them; and these are concepts of substances. Hence
there are those who doubt that Hume was serious in his elaborate reasoning
away of substances. The fact is that Hume “reasoned away” substance only
in the sense of an unknowable substratum of phenomena, and not in the
sense of a something that exists in itself.( ) So far from denying the
existence of entities that exist in themselves, he seems to have
multiplied these beyond the wildest dreams of all previous philosophers
_by substantializing accidents_.( ) What he does call into doubt is the
capacity of the human mind to attain to a knowledge of the specific
natures of such entities; and even here the arguments of phenomenism
strike the false Cartesian theory of knowledge, rather than the sober and
moderate teachings of scholasticism regarding the nature and limitations
of our knowledge of substances.

 . THE SCHOLASTIC VIEW OF OUR KNOWLEDGE IN REGARD TO THE EXISTENCE AND
NATURE OF SUBSTANCES.—What, then, are these latter teachings? That we have
a direct, intellectual insight into the specific essence or nature of a
corporeal substance such as gold, similar to our insight into the abstract
essence of a triangle? By no means; Locke was quite right in rejecting the
Cartesian claim to intuitions which were supposed to yield up all
knowledge of things by “mathematical,” _i.e._ deductive, _a priori_
reasoning. The scholastic teaching is briefly as follows:—

First, as regards our knowledge of the _existence_ of substances, and the
manner in which we obtain our concept of substance. We get this concept
from corporeal substances, and afterwards apply it to spiritual
substances; so that our knowledge of the former is “immediate” only in the
relative sense of being prior to the latter, not in the sense that it is a
direct intuition of the natures of corporeal substances. We have no such
direct insight into their natures. But our concept of them as actually
existing is also immediate in the sense that _at first_ we _spontaneously_
conceive _every_ object which comes before our consciousness _as something
existing in itself_. The child apprehends each separate stimulant of its
sense perception—resistance, colour, sound, etc.—as a “this ”or a “that,”
_i.e._ as a separate something, existing there in itself; in other words
it apprehends all realities as substances: not, of course, that the child
has yet any reflex knowledge of what a substance is, but unknowingly it
applies to all realities at first the concept which it undoubtedly
possesses “something existing in itself”. It likewise apprehends each such
reality as “one” or “undivided in itself,” and as “distinct from other
things”. Such is the child’s immediate, direct, and implicit idea of
substance. But if we are to believe Hume, what is true of the child
remains true of the man: for the latter, too, “every perception is a
substance, and every distinct part of a perception a distinct
substance”.( ) Nothing, however, could be more manifestly at variance
with the facts. For as reason is developed and reflective analysis
proceeds, the child most undoubtedly realizes that not everything that
falls within its experience has the character of “a something existing in
itself and distinct from other things”. “Walking,” “talking,” and
“actions” generally, it apprehends as realities,—as realities which,
however, do _not_ “exist in themselves,” but in other beings, in the
beings that “walk” and “talk” and “act”. And these latter beings it still
apprehends as “existing in themselves,” and as thus differing from the
former, which “exist not in themselves but in other things”. Thus the
child comes into possession of the notion of “accident,” and of the
further notion of “substance” as something which not only exists in itself
(οὐσία, _ens in se subsistens_), but which is also a support or subject of
accidents (ὑποκείμενον, _substans_, _substare_).( ) Nor, indeed, need
the child’s reason be very highly developed in order to realize that if
experience furnishes it with “beings that do not exist in themselves,”
there must also be beings which do exist in themselves: that if
“accidents” exist at all it would be unintelligible and self-contradictory
to deny the existence of “substances”.

Hence, _in the order of our experience_ the first, _implicit_ notion of
substance is that of “something existing in itself” (οὐσία); the first
_explicit_ notion of it, however, is that by which it is apprehended as “a
subject or support of accidents” (ὑποκείμενον, _sub-stare_, _substantia_);
then by reflection we go back to the _explicit_ notion of it as “something
existing in itself”. In the _real_ or _ontological_ order the perfection
of “existing in itself” is manifestly more fundamental than that of
“supporting accidents”. It is in accordance with a natural law of language
that we name things after the properties whereby they reveal themselves to
us, rather than by names implying what is more fundamental and essential
in them. “To exist in itself” is an absolute perfection, essential to
substance; “to support accidents” is only a relative perfection; nor can
we know _a priori_ but a substance might perhaps exist without any
accidents: we only know that accidents cannot exist without some
substance, or subject, or power which will sustain them in existence.

Can substance be apprehended by the senses, or only by intellect? Strictly
speaking, only by intellect: it is neither a “proper object” of any one
sense, such as taste, or colour, or sound; nor a “common object” of more
than one sense, as extension is with regard to sight and touch: it is, in
scholastic language, not a “_sensibile per se_,” not itself an object of
sense knowledge, but only “_sensibile per accidens_,” _i.e._ it may be
said to be “accidentally” an object of sense because of its conjunction
with accidents which are the proper objects of sense: so that when the
senses perceive accidents what they are really perceiving is the substance
affected by the accidents. But strictly and properly it is by intellect we
consciously grasp that which in the reality is the substance: while the
external and internal sense faculties make us aware of various qualities,
activities, or other accidents external to the “self,” or of various
states and conditions of the “self,” the intellect—which is a faculty of
the same soul as the sense faculties—makes us simultaneously aware of
corporeal substances actually existing outside us, or of the concrete
substance of the “ego” or “self,” existing and revealing itself to us in
and through its conscious activities, as the substantial, abiding, and
unifying subject and principle of these conscious activities.

Thus, then, do we attain to the concept of substance in general, to a
conviction of the concrete actual existence of that mode of being the
essential characteristic of which is “to exist in itself”.

In the next place, how do we reach a knowledge of the _specific natures_
of substances?( ) What is the character, and what are the limitations,
of such knowledge? Here, especially, the very cautious and moderate
doctrine of scholasticism has been largely misconceived and misrepresented
by phenomenists and others. About the specific nature of substances we
know just precisely what their accidents reveal to us—that and no more. We
have no intuitive insight into their natures; all our knowledge here is
abstractive and discursive. As are their properties—their activities,
energies, qualities, and all their accidents—so is their nature. We know
of the latter just what we can infer from the former. _Operari sequitur
esse_; we have no other key than this to knowledge of their specific
natures. We have experience of them only through their properties, their
behaviour, their activities; analysis of this experience, _a posteriori_
reasoning from it, inductive generalization based upon it: such are the
only channels we possess, the only means at our disposal, for reaching a
knowledge of their natures.

 . PHENOMENIST DIFFICULTIES AGAINST THIS VIEW. ITS VINDICATION.—Now the
phenomenist will really grant all this. His only objection will be that
such knowledge of substance is really no knowledge at all; or that, such
as it is, it is useless. But surely the knowledge that this mode of being
_really exists_, that there _is_ a mode of being which “exists in itself,”
is already some knowledge, and genuine knowledge, of substance? No doubt,
the information contained in this very indeterminate and generic concept
is imperfect; but then it is only a starting point, an all-important
starting point, however; for not only is it perfectible but every item of
knowledge we gather from experience perfects it, whereas without it the
intellect is paralysed in its attempt to interpret experience: indeed so
indispensable is this concept of substance to the human mind that, as we
have seen, no philosopher has ever been really able to dispense with it.
When phenomenists say that what _we_ call mind is only a bundle of
perceptions and ideas; when they speak of the flow of events, which is
_ourselves_, of which _we_ are conscious,( ) the very language they
themselves make use of cries out against their professed phenomenism. For
why speak of “we,” “ourselves,” etc., if there be no “we” or “ourselves”
other than the perceptions, ideas, events, etc., referred to?

Of course the explanation of this strange attitude on the part of these
philosophers is simple enough; they have a wrong conception of substance
and of the relation of accidents thereto; they appear to imagine that
according to the traditional teaching nothing of all we can discover about
accidents—or, as they prefer to term them, “phenomena”—can possibly throw
any light upon the nature of substance: as if the rôle of phenomena were
to cover up and conceal from us some sort of inner core (which they call
substance), and not rather to reveal to us the nature of that “being,
existing in itself,” of which these phenomena are the properties and
manifestations.

The denial of substance leads inevitably to the substantializing of
accidents. It is possible that the manner in which some scholastics have
spoken of accidents has facilitated this error.( ) Anyhow the error is
one that leads inevitably to contradictions in thought itself. Mill, for
instance, following out the arbitrary postulates of subjectivism and
phenomenism, finally analysed all reality into present sensations of the
individual consciousness, _plus_ permanent possibilities of sensations.
Now, consistently with the idealistic postulate, these “permanent
possibilities” should be nothing more than a certain tone, colouring,
quality of the “present” sensation, due to the fact that this has in it,
as part and parcel of itself, feelings of memory and expectation; in which
case the “present sensation,” taken in its concrete fulness, would be the
sole reality, and would exist in itself. This “solipsism” is the ultimate
logical issue of subjective idealism, and it is a sufficient _reductio ad
absurdum_ of the whole system. Or else, to evade this issue, the
“permanent possibilities” are supposed to be something really other than
the “present sensations”. In which case we must ask what Mill can mean by
a “permanent _possibility_”. Whether it be subjective or objective
possibility, it is presumably, according to Mill’s thought, some property
or appurtenance of the individual consciousness, _i.e._ a quality proper
to a subject or substance.( ) But to deny that the conscious subject is
a substance, and at the same time to contend that it is a “permanent
_possibility_ of sensation,” _i.e._ that it has properties which can
appertain only to a substance, is simply to hold what is
self-contradictory.

After these explanations it will be sufficient merely to state formally
the proof that substances really exist. It is exceedingly simple, and its
force will be appreciated from all that has been said so far: Whatever we
become aware of as existing at all must exist either in itself, or by
being sustained, supported in existence, in something else in which it
inheres. If it exists in itself it is a substance; if not it is an
accident, and then the “something else” which supports it, must in turn
either exist in itself or in something else. But since an infinite regress
in things existing not in themselves but in other things is impossible, we
are forced to admit the reality of a mode of being which exists in
itself—_viz._ substance.

Or, again, we are forced to admit the real existence of accidents—or, if
you will, “phenomena” or “appearances”—_i.e._ of realities or modes of
being whose nature is manifestly to modify or qualify in some way or other
some subject in which they inhere. Can we conceive a _state_ which is not
a state of something? a phenomenon or appearance which is not an
appearance of something? a vital act which is not an act of a living
thing? a sensation, thought, desire, emotion, unless of some conscious
being that feels, thinks, desires, experiences the emotion? No; and
therefore since such accidental modes of being really exist, there exists
also the substantial mode of being in which they inhere.

And the experienced realities which verify this notion of “substance” as
the “mode of being which exists in itself,” are manifestly _not one but
manifold_. Individual “persons” and “things”—men, animals, plants—are all
so many really and numerically distinct substances ( ). So, too, are the
ultimate individual elements in the inorganic universe, whatever these may
be ( ). Nor does the universal interaction of these individuals on one
another, or their manifold forms of interdependence on one another
throughout the course of their ever-changing existence and activities,
interfere in any way with the substantiality of the mode of being of each.
These mutual relations of all sorts, very real and actual as they
undoubtedly are, only constitute the universe a _cosmos_, thus endowing it
with _unity of order_, but not with _unity of substance_ ( ).

Let us now meet the objection of Hume: that there is no substantial soul
distinct from its acts, that it is only the sum-total of the acts, each of
these being a substance. The objection has been repeated in the
metaphorical language in which Huxley and Taine speak of the soul, the
living soul, as nothing more than a _republic_ of conscious states, or the
movement of a _luminous sheaf_ etc. And Locke and Berkeley had already
contended that an apple or an orange is nothing more than a collection or
sum-total of sensible qualities, so that if we conceive these removed
there is nothing left, for beyond these there was nothing there.

Now we admit that the substance of the soul is not _adequately_ distinct
from its acts, or the substance of the apple or orange from its qualities.
As a matter of fact we never experience substance apart from accidents or
accidents apart from substance;( ) we do not know whether there exists,
or even whether there can exist, a created substance devoid of all
accidents; nor can we know, from the light of reason alone, whether any
accidents could exist apart from substance.( ) We have, therefore, no
ground in natural experience for demonstrating such an _adequate_ real
distinction ( ) between substance and accidents as would involve the
separability of the latter from the former. But that the acts of the soul
are so many really distinct entities, each “existing in itself,” each
therefore a substance, so that the term “soul” is merely a title we give
to their sum-total; and similarly the terms “apple” and “orange” merely
titles of collections of qualities each of which would be an entity
existing in itself and really distinct from the others, each in other
words a substance,—this we entirely deny. We regard it as utterly
unreasonable of phenomenists thus to multiply substances. Our contention
is that the individual soul or mind is one substance, and that it is
_partially_ and _really_, though _not adequately_, distinct from the
various conscious acts, states, processes, functions, which are certainly
themselves real entities,—entities, however, the reality of which is
dependent on that of the soul, entities which this dependent or “inhering”
mode of being marks off as distinct in their nature, and incapable of
total identification with that other non-inhering or subsisting mode of
being which characterizes the substance of the soul.

We cannot help thinking that this phenomenist denial of substance, with
its consequent inevitable substantialization of accidents, is largely due
to a mistaken manner of regarding the concrete existing object as a mere
mechanical bundle of distinct and independent abstractions. Every aspect
of it is mentally isolated from the others and held apart as an
“impression,” an “idea,” etc. Then the object is supposed to be
constituted by, and to consist of, a sum-total of these separate
“elements,” integrated together by some sort of mental chemistry. The
attempt is next made to account for our total conscious experience of
reality by a number of principles or laws of what is known as “association
of ideas”. And phenomenists discourse learnedly about these laws in
apparent oblivion of the fact that by denying the reality of any
substantial, abiding, self-identical soul, distinct from the transient
conscious states of the passing moment, they have left out of account the
only reality capable of “associating” any mental states, or making mental
life at all intelligible. Once the soul is regarded merely as “a series of
conscious states,” or a “stream of consciousness,” or a succession of
“pulses of cognitive consciousness,” such elementary facts as memory,
unity of consciousness, the feeling of personal identity and personal
responsibility, become absolutely inexplicable.( )

Experience, therefore, does reveal to us the real existence of substances,
of “things that exist in themselves,” and likewise the reality of other
modes of being which have their actuality only by inhering in the
substances which they affect. “A substance,” says St. Thomas, “is a thing
whose nature it is to exist not in another, whereas an accident is a thing
whose nature it is to exist in another.”( ) Every concrete being that
falls within our experience—a man, an oak, an apple—furnishes us with the
data of these two concepts: the being existing in itself, the substance;
and secondly, its accidents. The former concept comprises only
constitutive principles which we see to be _essential_ to that sort of
being: the material, the vegetative, the sentient, the rational principle,
in a man, or his soul and his body; the material principle and the formal
or vital principle in an apple. The latter concept, that of accidents,
comprises only those characteristics of the thing which are no doubt real,
but which do not constitute the essence of the being, which can change or
be absent without involving the destruction of that essence. An
intellectual analysis of our experience enables us—and, as we have
remarked above, it alone enables us—to distinguish between these two
classes of objective concepts, the concept of the principles that are
essential to the substance or being that exists in itself, and the concept
of the attributes that are accidental to this being; and experience alone
enables us, by studying the latter group, the accidents of the being,
whether naturally separable or naturally inseparable from the latter, to
infer from those accidents whatever we can know about the former group,
about the principles that constitute the specific nature of the particular
kind of substance that may be under investigation.

It may, perhaps, be urged against all this, that experience does _not_
warrant our placing a _real_ distinction between the entities we describe
as “accidents” and those which we claim to be constitutive of the
“substance,” or “thing which exists in itself”; that all the entities
without exception, which we apprehend by distinct concepts in any concrete
existing being such as a man, an oak, or an apple, are only one and the
same individual reality looked at under different aspects; that the
distinction between them is only a logical or mental distinction; that we
separate in thought what is one in reality because we regard each aspect
in the abstract and apart from the others; that to suppose in any such
concrete being the existence of two distinct modes of reality—_viz._ a
reality that exists in itself, and other realities inhering in this
latter—is simply to make the mistake of transferring to the real order of
concrete things what we find in the logical order of conceptual
abstractions.

This objection, which calls for serious consideration, leads to a
different conclusion from the previous objection. It suggests the
conclusion, not that substances are unreal, but that accidents are unreal.
Even if it were valid it would leave untouched the existence of
substances. We hope to meet it satisfactorily by establishing presently
the existence of accidents really distinct from the substances in which
they inhere. While the objection draws attention to the important truth
that distinctions recognized in the conceptual order are not always real,
it certainly does not prove that all accidents are only mentally distinct
aspects of substance. For surely a man’s thoughts, volitions, feelings,
emotions, his conscious states generally, changing as they do from moment
to moment, are not really identical with the man himself who continues to
exist throughout this incessant change; yet they are realities, appearing
and disappearing and having all their actuality in him, while he persists
as an actual being “existing in himself”.

 . ERRONEOUS VIEWS ON THE NATURE OF SUBSTANCE.—If we fail to remember
that the notion of substance, as “a being existing in itself and
supporting the accidents which affect it,” is a most abstract and generic
notion; if we transfer it in this abstract condition to the real order; if
we imagine that the concrete individual substances which actually exist in
the real order merely verify this widest notion and are devoid of all
further content; that they possess in themselves no further richness of
reality; if we forget that actual substances, in all the variety of their
natures, as material, or living, or sentient, or rational and spiritual,
are indeed full, vibrant, palpitating with manifold and diversified
reality; if we rob them of all this perfection or locate it in their
accidents as considered apart from themselves,—we are likely to form very
erroneous notions both of substances and of accidents, and of their real
relations to one another. It will help us to form accurate concepts of
them, concepts really warranted by experience, if we examine briefly some
of the more remarkable misconceptions of substance that have at one time
or other gained currency.

(_a_) Substance is not a concrete core on which concrete accidents are
superimposed, or a sort of kernel of which they form the rind. Such a way
of conceiving them is as misleading as it is crude and material. No doubt
the language which, for want of better, we have to employ in regard to
substance and accidents, suggests fancies of that kind: we speak of
substance “supporting,” “sustaining” accidents, and of these as “supported
by,” and “inhering in” the former. But this does not really signify any
juxtaposition or superposition of concrete entities. The substance is a
subject determinable by its various accidents; these are actualizations of
its potentiality; its relation to them is the relation of the potential to
the actual, of a “material” or “determinable” subject to “formal” or
“determining” principles. But the appearance or disappearance of accidents
never takes place in the same concrete subject: by their variations the
concrete subject is changed: at any instant the substance affected by its
accidents is one individual concrete being ( ), and the inevitable result
of any modification in them is that this individual, concrete being is
changed, is no longer the same. No doubt, it preserves its substantial
identity throughout accidental change, but not its concrete identity,—that
is to say, not wholly. This is the characteristic of every finite being,
subject to change and existing in time: it has the actuality of its being,
not _tota simul_, but only gradually, successively ( ). From this, too,
we see that although substance is a more perfect mode of being than
accident—because the former exists in itself while the latter has its
actuality only in something else,—nevertheless, created, finite substance
is a mode of being which is itself imperfect, and perfectible by
accidents: another illustration of the truth that all created perfection
is only relative, not absolute. To the notion of “inherence” we shall
return in connexion with our treatment of accidents ( ).

(_b_) Again, substance is wrongly conceived as an _inert_ substratum
underlying accidents. This false notion appears to have originated with
Descartes: he conceived the two great classes of created substances,
matter and spirit, as essentially inert. For him, matter is simply a _res
extensa_; extension in three dimensions constitutes its essence, and
extension is of course inert: all motion is given to matter and conserved
in it by God. Spirit or soul is simply a _res cogitans_, a being whose
essence is thought; but in thinking spirit too is passive, for it simply
receives ideas as wax does the impress of a seal. Nay, even when soul or
spirit wills it is really inert or passive, for God puts all its volitions
into it.( ) From these erroneous conceptions the earlier disciples of
Descartes took the obvious step forward into Occasionalism; and to them
likewise may be traced the conviction of many contemporary philosophers
that the human soul—a being that is so eminently vital and active—cannot
possibly be a substance: neither indeed could it be, if substance were
anything like what Descartes conceived it to be. The German philosophers,
Wundt and Paulsen, for example, argue that the soul cannot be a substance.
But when we inquire what they mean by substance, what do we find? That
with them the concept of substance applies only to the _corporeal_
universe, where it properly signifies the atoms which are “the absolutely
permanent substratum, qualitatively and quantitatively unchangeable, of
all corporeal reality”.( ) No wonder they would argue that the soul is
not a substance!

No actually existing substance is inert. What is true, however, is this,
that when we conceive a being as a substance, when we think of it under
the abstract concept of substance, we of course abstract from its concrete
existence as an active agent; in other words we consider it not from the
_dynamic_, but from the _static_ aspect, not as it is in the concrete, but
as constituting an object of abstract thought: and so the error of
Descartes seems to have been that already referred to,—the mistake of
transferring to the real order conditions that obtain only in the logical
order.

(_c_) To the Cartesian conception of substances as inert entities endowed
only with motions communicated to them _ab extra_, the mechanical or
atomist conception of reality, as it is called, Leibniz opposed the other
extreme conception of substances as _essentially active entities_. For him
substance is an _ens præditum vi agendi_: activity is the fundamental note
in the concept of substance. These essentially active entities he
conceived as being all _simple_ and _unextended_, the corporeal no less
than the spiritual ones. And he gave them the title of _monads_. It is
unnecessary for our present purpose to go into any details of his
ingenious dynamic theory of the universe as a vast system of these monads.
We need only remark that while combating the theory of inert substances he
himself erred in the opposite extreme. He conceived every monad as endowed
essentially with active tendency or effort which is never without its
effect,—an exclusively _immanent_ effect, however, which is the constant
result of constant immanent action: for he denied the possibility of
transitive activity, _actio transiens_; and he conceived the immanent
activity of the monad as being in its nature _perceptive_,( ) that is to
say, _cognitive_ or _representative_, in the sense that each monad, though
“wrapt up in itself, doorless and windowless,” if we may so describe it,
nevertheless mirrors more or less inchoatively, vaguely, or clearly, all
other monads, and is thus itself a miniature of the whole universe, a
microcosm of the macrocosm. Apart from the fancifulness of his whole
system, a fancifulness which is, however, perhaps more apparent than real,
his conception of substance is much less objectionable than that of
Descartes. For as a matter of fact every individual, actually existing
substance is endowed with an internal directive tendency towards some term
to be realized or attained by its activities. Every substance has a
transcendental relation to the operations which are natural to it, and
whereby it tends to realize the purpose of its being. But nevertheless
substance should not be defined by action, for all action of created
substances is an accident, not a substance; nor even by its transcendental
relation to action, for when we conceive it under this aspect we conceive
it as an _agent_ or _cause_, not as a _substance_ simply. The latter
concept abstracts from action and reveals its object simply as “a reality
existing in itself”. When we think of a substance as a principle of action
we describe it by the term _nature_.

(_d_) A very widespread notion of substance is the conception of it as a
“_permanent_,” “_stable_,” “_persisting_” subject of “_transient_,”
“_ephemeral_” realities called accidents or phenomena. This view of
substance is mainly due to the influence of Kant’s philosophy. According
to his teaching we can think the succession of phenomena which appear to
our sense consciousness only by the aid of a pure intuition in which our
sensibility apprehends them, _viz._ _time_. Now the application of the
category of substance to this pure intuition of our sensibility engenders
a _schema_ of the imagination, _viz._ the _persistence_ of the object in
time. Persistence, therefore, is for him the essential note of substance.

Herbert Spencer, too, has given apt expression to this widely prevalent
notion: “Existence means nothing more than persistence; and hence in Mind
that which persists in spite of all changes, and maintains the unity of
the aggregate in defiance of all attempts to divide it, is that of which
existence in the full sense of the word must be predicated—that which we
must postulate as the substance of Mind in contradistinction to the
varying forms it assumes. But if so, the impossibility of knowing the
substance of Mind is manifest.”( )

Thus, substance is conceived as the unique but hidden and unknowable basis
of all the phenomena which constitute the totality of human experience.

What is to be said of such a conception? There is just this much truth in
it: that substance is _relatively_ stable or permanent, _i.e._ in
comparison with accidents; the latter cannot survive the destruction or
disappearance of the substance in which they inhere, while a substance can
persist through incessant change of its accidents. But accidents are not
_absolutely_ ephemeral, nor is substance _absolutely_ permanent: were an
accident to exist for ever it would not cease to be an accident, nor would
a substance be any less a substance were it created and then
instantaneously annihilated. But in the latter case the human mind could
not apprehend the substance; for since all human cognitive experience
takes place _in time_, which involves _duration_, the mind can apprehend a
substance only on condition that the latter has some permanence, some
appreciable duration in existence. This fact, too, explains in some
measure the error of conceiving permanence as essential to a substance.
But the error has another source also: Under the influence of subjective
idealism philosophers have come to regard the individual’s consciousness
of his own self, the consciousness of the _Ego_, as the sole and unique
source of our concept of substance. The passage we have just quoted from
Spencer is an illustration. And since the spiritual principle of our
conscious acts is a permanent principle which abides throughout all of
them, thus explaining the unity of the individual human consciousness,
those who conceive substance in general after the model of the _Ego_,
naturally conceive it as an essentially stable subject of incessant and
evanescent processes.

But it is quite arbitrary thus to conceive the _Ego_ as the sole type of
substance. Bodies are substances as well as spirits, matter as well as
mind. And the permanence of corporeal substances is merely relative.
Nevertheless they are really substances. The relative stability of spirit
which is immortal, and the relative instability of matter which is
corruptible, have nothing to do with the substantiality of either. Both
alike are substances, for both alike have that mode of being which
consists in their existing in themselves, and not by inhering in other
things as accidents do.

(_e_) Spencer’s conception of substance as the permanent, unknowable
ground of phenomena, implies that substance is one, not manifold, and thus
suggests the view of reality known as _Monism_. There is yet another
mistaken notion of substance, the notion in which the well known
pantheistic philosophy of Spinoza has had its origin. Spinoza appears to
have given the ambiguous definition of Descartes—“_Substantia est res quae
ita existit, ut nulla alia re indigeat ad existendum_”—an interpretation
which narrowed its application down to the Necessary Being; for he defined
substance in the following terms: “_Per substantiam intelligo id quod est
in se et per se concipitur: hoc est, id cujus conceptus non indiget
conceptu alterius rei a quo formari debeat_”. By the ambiguous phrase,
that substance “requires no other thing for existing,” Descartes certainly
meant to convey what has always been understood by the scholastic
expression that substance “exists _in_ itself”. He certainly did not mean
that substance is a reality which “exists _of_ itself,” _i.e._ that it is
what scholastics mean by _Ens a se_, the Being that has its actuality from
its own essence, by virtue of its very nature, and in absolute
independence of all other being; for such Being is One alone, the
Necessary Being, God Himself, whereas Descartes clearly held and taught
the real existence of finite, created substances.( ) Yet Spinoza’s
definition of substance is applicable only to such a being that our
concept of this being shows forth the actual existence of the latter as
absolutely explained and accounted for by reference to the essence of this
being itself, and independently of any reference to other being. In other
words, it applies only to the Necessary Being. This conception of
substance is the starting-point of Spinoza’s pantheistic philosophy.

Now, the scholastic definition of substance and Spinoza’s definition
embody two entirely distinct notions. Spinoza’s definition conveys what
scholastics mean by the Self-Existent Being, _Ens a se_; and this the
scholastics distinguish from caused or created being, _ens ab alio_. Both
phrases refer formally and primarily, not to the mode of a being’s
existence when it does exist, but to the origin of this existence in
relation to the being’s essence; and specifically it marks the distinction
between the Essence that is self-explaining, self-existent, essentially
actual (“_a_ se”), the Necessary Being, and essences that do not
themselves explain or account for their own actual existence, essences
that have not their actual existence from themselves or of themselves,
essences that are in regard to their actual existence contingent or
dependent, essences which, therefore, if they actually exist, can do so
only dependently on some other being whence they have derived this
existence (“_ab_ alio”) and on which they essentially depend for its
continuance.

Not the least evil of Spinoza’s definition is the confusion caused by
gratuitously wresting an important philosophical term like _substance_
from its traditional sense and using it with quite a different meaning;
and the same is true in its measure of the other mistaken notions of
substance which we have been examining. By defining substance as an _ens
in se_, or _per se stans_, scholastic philosophers mean simply that
substance does not depend _intrinsically_ on any _subjective_ or
_material_ cause in which its actuality would be supported; they do not
mean to imply that it does not depend _extrinsically_ on an efficient
cause from which it has its actuality and by which it is conserved in
being. They assert that all _created_ substances, no less than all
accidents, have their being “_ab alio_” from God; that they exist only by
the Divine creation and conservation, and act only by the Divine
_concursus_ or concurrence; but while substances and accidents are both
alike dependent on this extrinsic conserving and concurring influence of a
Divine, Transcendent Being, substances are exempt from this other and
distinct mode of dependence which characterizes accidents: intrinsic
dependence on a subject in which they have their actuality.( )


    When we say that substance exists “_in_ itself,” obviously we do
    not attach to the preposition “_in_” any _local_ signification, as
    a part existing “in” the whole. Nor do we mean that they exist
    “in” themselves in the same sense as they have their being “in”
    God. In a certain true sense all creatures exist “in” God: _In
    ipso enim vivimus, et movemur, et sumus_ (Acts xxii.,  ), in the
    sense that they are kept in being by His omnipresent conserving
    power. But He does not sustain them as a subject in which they
    inhere, as substance sustains the accidents which determine it,
    thereby giving expression to its concrete actuality.( ) By
    saying that substance exists “in itself” we mean to exclude the
    notion of its existing “in another” thing, as an accident does.
    And this we shall understand better by examining a little more
    closely this peculiar mode of being which characterizes accidents.


 . THE NATURE OF ACCIDENT. ITS RELATION TO SUBSTANCE. ITS CAUSES.—From
all that has preceded we will have gathered the general notion of
_accident_ as that mode of real being which is found to have its reality,
not by existing in itself, but by affecting, determining, some substance
in which it inheres as in a subject. What do we mean by saying that
accidents _inhere in_ substances as their _subjects_? Here we must at once
lay aside as erroneous the crude conception of something as located
spatially within something else, as contained in container, as _e.g._
water in a vessel; and the equally crude conception of something being in
something else as a part is in the whole, as _e.g._ an arm is in the body.
Such imaginations are wholly misleading.

The actually existing substance has its being or reality; it is an actual
essence. Each real accident of it is likewise a reality, and has an
essence, distinct from that of the substance, yet not wholly independent
of the latter: it is a determination of the determinable being of the
substance, affecting or modifying the latter in some way or other, and
having no other _raison d’être_ than this rôle of actualizing in some
specific way some receptive potentiality of the concrete substance. And
since its reality is thus dependent on that of the substance which it
affects, we cannot ascribe to it actual essence or being in the same sense
as we ascribe this to substance, but only analogically( ) ( ). Hence
scholastics commonly teach that we ought to conceive an accident rather as
an “entity _of an entity_,” “ens _entis_,” than as an entity simply;
rather as inhering, indwelling, affecting (_in_-esse) some subject, than
simply as existing itself (_esse_); as something whose essence is rather
the determination, affection, modification of an essence than itself an
essence proper, the term “essence” designating properly only a substance:
_accidentis esse est inesse_.( ) This conception might, no doubt, if
pressed too far, be inapplicable to absolute accidents, like quantity,
which are something more than mere modifications of substance; but it
rightly emphasizes the dependence of the reality of accident on that of
substance, the non-substantial and “diminished” character of the
“accident”-mode of being; it also helps to show that the “inherence” of
accident in substance is a relation—of determining to determinable
being—which is _sui generis_; and finally it puts us on our guard against
the errors that may be, and have been, committed by conceiving accidents
in the abstract and reasoning about them apart from their substances, as
if they themselves were substances.

This “inherence” of accident in substance, this mode of being whereby it
affects, determines or modifies the substance, differs from accident to
accident; these, in fact, are classified into _suprema genera_ by reason
of their different ways of affecting substance ( ). To this we shall
return later. Here we may inquire, about this general relation of accident
to substance, whether it is _essential_ to an accident _actually to inhere
in_ a substance, if not immediately, then at least through the medium of
some other accident. We suggest this latter alternative because as we
shall see presently there are some accidents, such as colour, taste,
shape, which immediately affect the _extension_ of a body, and only
through this the substance of the body itself. Now the ordinary course of
nature never presents us with accidents except as inhering, mediately or
immediately, in a substance. Nor is it probable that the natural light of
our reason would ever suggest to us the possibility of an exception to
this general law. But the Christian philosopher knows, from Divine
Revelation, that in the Blessed Eucharist the _quantity_ or _extension_ of
bread and wine, together with the taste, colour, form, etc., which affect
this extension, _remain in existence_ after their connatural substance of
bread and wine has disappeared by transubstantiation. In the supernatural
order of His providence God preserves these accidents in existence without
a subject; but in this state, though they do not _actually inhere_ in any
substance, they _retain their natural aptitude and exigence_ for such
inherence. The Christian philosopher, therefore, will not define accident
as “the mode of being which inheres in a subject,” but as “the mode of
being which _in the ordinary course of nature_ inheres in a subject,” or
as “the mode of being which has _a natural exigence_ to inhere in a
subject”. It is not _actual inherence_, but the _natural exigence to
inhere_, that is essential to an accident as such.( )

Furthermore, an accident needs a substance not formally _qua_ substance,
or as a mode of being naturally existing in itself; it needs a substance
_as a subject_ in which to inhere, which it will in some way affect,
determine, qualify; but the subject in which it immediately inheres need
not always be a substance: it may be some other accident, in which case
both of course will naturally require some substance as their ultimate
basis.

Comparing now the concept of accident with that of substance, we find that
the latter is presupposed by the former; that the latter is prior _in
thought_ to the former; that we conceive accident as something over and
above, something superadded to substance as subject. For instance, we can
define matter and form without the prior concept of body, or animality and
rationality without the prior concept of man; but we cannot define colour
without the prior concept of body, or the faculty of speech without the
prior concept of man.( )

Substance, therefore, is prior _in thought_ to accident; but is the
substance itself also prior _temporally_ (prior _tempore_) to its
accidents? It is prior in time to some of them, no doubt; the individual
human being is thus prior, for instance, to the knowledge he may acquire
during life. But there is no reason for saying that a substance must be
prior _in time_ to _all_ its accidents;( ) so far as we can discover, no
created substance comes into existence devoid of all accidents: corporeal
substance devoid of internal quantity, or spiritual substance devoid of
intellect and will.

If prior in thought, though not necessarily in time, to its accidents, is
a substance prior to its accidents _really_, _ontologically_ (prior
_natura_)? Yes; it is the real or ontological principle of its accidents;
it sustains them, and they depend on it. It is a passive or material cause
(using the term “material” in the wide sense, as applicable even to
spiritual substances), or a receptive subject, determined in some way by
them as formal principles. It is at the same time an efficient and passive
cause of some of its own accidents: the soul is an efficient cause of its
own immanent processes of thought and volition, and at the same time a
passive principle of them, undergoing real change by their occurrence. Of
others it is merely a receptive, determinable subject, of those, namely,
which have an adequate and necessary foundation in its own essence, and
which are called _properties_ in the strict sense: without these it cannot
exist, though they do not constitute its essence, or enter into the
concept of the latter; but it is not prior to them in time, nor is it the
_efficient cause_ of them; it is, however, a real principle of them, an
essence from the reality of which they necessarily result, and on which
their own reality depends. Such, for instance, is the faculty of thought,
or volition, or speech in regard to man.

The accident-mode of being is, therefore, a mode of being which determines
a substance in some real way. Its _formal effect_ is to give the substance
some real and definite determination: not _esse simpliciter_ but _esse
tale_. With the substance it constitutes a concrete real being which is
_unum per accidens_, not _unum per se_.

The accident has no _formal cause_: it is itself a “form” and its
causality is that of a formal cause, which consists in its communicating
itself to a subject, and, by its union therewith, constituting some new
reality—in this case a concrete being endowed with “accidental” unity.

Accidents have of course, a _material cause_; not, however, in the sense
of a _materia ex qua_, a material from which they are constituted,
inasmuch as they are simple “forms”; but in the sense of a _subject_ in
which they are received and in which they inhere; and this “material
cause” is, proximately or remotely, _substance_.

Substance also is the _final cause_, the _raison d’être_, of the reality
of the accidental mode of being. Accidents exist for the perfecting of
substances: _accidentia sunt propter substantiam_. As we have seen
already, and as will appear more clearly later on, the fundamental reason
for the reality of an accidental mode of being, really distinct from the
created or finite substance (for the Infinite Substance has no accidents),
is that the created substance is imperfect, limited in its actual
perfection, does not exist _tota simul_, but develops, through a process
of change in time, from its first or _essential_ perfection, through
_intermediate_ perfections, till it reaches the _final_ perfection ( ) of
its being.

Have all accidents _efficient causes_? Those which are called common
accidents as distinct from _proper_ accidents or _properties_ ( ) have
undoubtedly efficient causes: the various agencies which produce real but
accidental changes in the individual substances of the universe. _Proper_
accidents, however, inasmuch as they of necessity exist simultaneously
with the substances to which they belong, and flow from these substances
by a necessity of the very essence of these latter, cannot be said to have
any efficient causes other than those which contribute by their efficiency
to the _substantial changes_ by which these substances are brought into
actual existence; nor can they be said to be _caused efficiently_ by these
substances themselves, but only to “flow” or “result” necessarily from the
latter, inasmuch as they come into existence simultaneously with, but
dependently on, these substances. Hence, while substances are universally
regarded as _real principles_ of their properties—as, for instance, the
soul in regard to intellect and will, or corporeal substance in regard to
quantity—they are not really efficient causes of their properties, _i.e._
they do not _produce_ these properties by _action_. For these properties
are antecedent to all _action_ of the substance; nor can a created
substance _act_ by its _essence_, but only through active powers, or
faculties, or forces, which meditate between the essence of a created
substance and its actions, and which are the proximate principles of these
actions, while the substance or nature is their remote principle. Hence
the “properties” which necessarily result from a substance or nature, have
as their efficient causes the agencies productive of the substance
itself.( )

 . MAIN DIVISIONS OF ACCIDENTS.—These considerations will help us to
understand the significance of a few important divisions of accidents:
into proper and common, inseparable and separable. We shall then be in a
position to examine the nature of the distinction between accidents and
substance, and to establish the existence of accidents really distinct
from substance.

(_a_) The attributes which we affirm of substance, other than the notes
constitutive of its essence, are divided into _proper_ accidents, or
_properties_ in the strict sense (ἴδιον, _proprium_), and _common_
accidents, or accidents in the more ordinary sense (συμβεβηκός,
_ac-cidens_). A property is an accident which belongs exclusively to a
certain class or kind of substance, and is found _always_ in _all_ members
of that class, inasmuch as it has an adequate foundation in the nature of
that substance and a necessary connexion therewith. Such, for instance,
are the faculties of intellect and will in all spiritual beings; the
faculties of speaking, laughing, weeping in man; the temporal and spatial
mode of being which characterizes all created substances.( ) When
regarded from the logical point of view, as attributes predicable of their
substances considered as logical subjects, they are distinguished on the
one hand from what constitutes the essence of this subject (as _genus_,
_differentia_, _species_), but also on the other hand from those
attributes which cannot be seen to have any absolutely necessary connexion
with this subject. The latter attributes alone are called _logical
accidents_, the test being the absence of a necessary connexion in thought
with the logical subject.( ) But the former class, which are
distinguished from “logical” accidents and called _logical properties_
(“_propria_”) are none the less _real accidents_ when considered from the
ontological standpoint; for they do not constitute the essence of the
substance; they are outside the concept of the latter, and
super-added—though necessarily—to it. Whether, however, all or any of
these “properties,” which philosophers thus classify as real or
ontological accidents, “proper” accidents, of certain substances, are
_really_ distinct from the concrete, individual substances to which they
belong, or are only aspects of the latter, “substantial modes,” only
_virtually_ distinct in each case from the individual substance itself,—is
another and more difficult question ( ). Such a property is certainly not
really separable from its substance; we cannot conceive either to exist
really without the other; though we can by abstraction think, and reason,
and speak, about either apart from the other.( ) Real inseparability is,
however, regarded by scholastic philosophers as quite compatible with what
they understand by a real distinction ( ).

A _common_ accident is one which has no such absolutely necessary
connexion with its substance as a “property” has; one which, therefore,
can be conceived as absent from the substance without thereby entailing
the destruction of the latter’s essence, or of anything bound up by a
necessity of thought with this essence. And such common accidents are of
two kinds.

They may be such that in the ordinary course of nature, and so far as its
forces and laws are concerned, they are never found to be absent from
their connatural substances—_inseparable_ accidents. Thus the colour of
the Ethiopian is an inseparable accident of his human nature as an
Ethiopian; he is naturally black; but if born of Ethiopian parents he
would still be an Ethiopian even if he happened to grow up white instead
of black. We could not, however, conceive an Ethiopian, or any other human
being, existing without the faculties (not the use) of intellect and will,
or the faculty (not the organs, or the actual exercise of the faculty) of
human speech.

Or common accidents may be such that they are sometimes present in their
substances, and sometimes absent—_separable_ accidents. These are by far
the most numerous class of accidents: thinking, willing, talking, and
actions generally; health or illness; virtues, vices, acquired habits;
rest or motion, temperature, colour, form, location, etc.

(_b_) The next important division of accidents is that into mere
_extrinsic denominations_ and intrinsic accidents; the latter being
subdivided into _modal_ and _absolute_ accidents, respectively.

An _absolute_ accident is one which not merely affects its substance
intrinsically, giving the latter an actual determination or mode of being,
of some sort or other, but which has moreover some entity or reality
proper to itself whereby it thus affects the substance, an entity really
distinct from the essence of the substance thus determined by it. Such,
for instance, are all vital activities of living things;( ) knowledge,
and other acquired habits; quantity, the fundamental accident whereby
corporeal substances are all capable of existing extended in space; and
such sensible qualities and energies of matter as heat, colour, mechanical
force, electrical energy, etc. Such, too, according to many, are
intellect, will, and sense faculties in man.

There are, however, other intrinsic determinations of substance, other
modifications of the latter, which do not seem to involve any new or
additional reality in the substance, over and above the modification
itself. Such, for instance, are motion, rest, external form or figure, in
bodies. These are called _modal_ accidents. They often affect not the
substance itself immediately, but some absolute accident of the latter,
and are hence called “accidental modes”. Those enumerated are obviously
modes of the quantity of bodies. Now the appearance or disappearance of
such an accident in a substance undoubtedly involves a real change in the
latter, and not merely in our thought; when a body moves, or comes to
rest, or alters its form, there is a change in the reality as well as in
our thought; and in this sense these accidents are real and intrinsic to
their substances. Yet, though we cannot say that motion, rest, shape,
etc., are really identical with the body and only mentally distinct
aspects of it, at the same time neither can we say that by their
appearance or disappearance the body gains or loses any reality other than
an accidental determination of itself; whereas it does gain something more
than this when it is heated, or electrified, or increased in quantity;
just as a man who acquires knowledge, or virtue, is not only really
modified, but is modified by real entities which he has acquired, not
having actually possessed them before.

Finally, there are accidents which do not affect the substance
intrinsically at all, which do not determine any real change in it, but
merely give it an extrinsic denomination in relation to something outside
it ( ). Thus, while the _quality_ of heat is an absolute accident in a
body, the _action_ whereby the latter heats neighbouring bodies is no new
reality in the body itself, and produces no real change in the latter, but
only gives it the extrinsic denomination of _heating_ in reference to
these other bodies in which the effect really takes place. Similarly the
_location_ of any corporeal substance in _space_ or in _time_ relatively
to others in the space or time series—its _external_ place (_ubi_) or time
(_quando_), as they are called—or the relative position of its parts
(_situs_) in the place occupied by it: these do not intrinsically
determine it or confer upon it any intrinsic modification of its
substance. Not, indeed, that they are mere _entia rationis_, mere logical
fictions of our thought. They are realities, but not realities which
affect the substances denominated from them; they are accidental modes of
other substances, or of the absolute accidents of other substances.
Finally, the accident which we call a “_real_ relation” presupposes in its
subject some absolute accident such as quantity or quality, or some real
and intrinsic change determining these, or affecting the substance itself;
but whether relation is itself a reality over and above such foundation,
is a disputed question.

From these classifications of accidents it will be at once apparent that
the general notion of accident, as a dependent mode of being, superadded
to the essence of a substance and in some way determining the latter, is
realized in widely different and merely analogical ways in the different
ultimate classes of accidents.

 . REAL EXISTENCE OF ACCIDENTS. NATURE OF THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN
ACCIDENTS AND SUBSTANCE.—It would be superfluous to prove the general
proposition that accidents really exist. In establishing the real
existence of substances we have seen that the real existence of some
accidents at least has never been seriously denied. These are often called
nowadays _phenomena_; and philosophers who have denied or doubted the real
existence of substances have been called “phenomenists” simply because
they have admitted the real existence only of these phenomena; though, if
they were as logical as Hume they might have seen with him that such
denial, so far from abolishing substance, could only lead to the
substantializing of accidents ( ).

But while undoubtedly there are realities which “exist in themselves,”
such as individual men, animals and plants, there is no reason for
attributing this same mode of existence to entities such as the thoughts,
volitions, emotions, virtues or vices, of the individual man; or the
instinct, hunger, or illness of the dog; or the colour, perfume, or form
of the rose. The concrete individual man, or dog, or rose, reveals itself
to our minds as a substantial entity, affected with these various
accidental entities which are really distinct from the substantial entity
itself and from one another. Nay, in most of the instances just cited,
they are physically separable from the substantial entity in which they
inhere; not of course in the sense that they could actually exist without
it, but in the sense that it can and does continue to exist actually
without them ( ); for it continues to exist while they come and go,
appear and disappear.( ) Of course the _concrete individual_ man, or
dog, or rose, does not continue to _exist actually unchanged_, and
_totally_ identical with itself throughout the change of accidents ( ),
for the accidents are part of the concrete individual reality; nay, even
the substance itself of the concrete individual does not remain totally
unaffected by the change of the accidents; because if they _really_ affect
it, as they do, their change cannot leave it totally unaffected; substance
is not at all a changeless, concrete core, surrounded by an ever-changing
rind or vesture of accidents; or a dark, hidden, immutable and inscrutable
background of a panorama of phenomena ( ). But though it is beyond all
doubt really affected by the change of its accidents, it is also beyond
all doubt independent of them in regard to the essential mode of its
being, in as much as it exists and continues to exist in itself throughout
all fluctuation of its accidents; while these on the other hand have only
that essentially dependent mode of being whereby they are actual only by
affecting and determining some subject in which they inhere and which
supports their actuality.

The existence, therefore, of some accidents, which are not only really
distinct but even physically separable from their substances, cannot
reasonably be called into question. To deny the existence of such
accidents, or, what comes to the same thing, their real distinction from
substance, is to take up some one of these three equally untenable
positions: that all the changes which take place within and around us are
substantial changes; or, that there is no such thing as real change, all
change being a mental illusion; or, that contradictory states can be
affirmed of the same reality.( )

But the nature of the real distinction between accidents and substance is
not in all cases so easy to determine. Nor can we discuss the question
here in reference to each _summum genus_ of accident separately. Deferring
to the chapter on _Relation_ the question of the distinction of this
particular accident from substance and the other categories, we may
confine our attention here to the distinction between substance and the
three classes of accidents we have called _extrinsic denominations_,
_modal_ accidents, and _absolute_ accidents respectively. “There are
accidents,” writes Kleutgen,( ) “which place nothing and change nothing
in the subject itself, but are ascribed to it by reason of some extrinsic
thing; others, again, produce indeed in the subject itself some new mode
of being, but without their existing in it as a new reality, distinct from
its reality; others, finally, are themselves a new reality, and have thus
a being which is proper to themselves, though this being is of course
dependent on the substance. These latter alone can be _really_ distinct
from the substance, in the full sense in which a real distinction is that
between thing and thing. Now Cartesian philosophers have denied that there
are any such accidents as those of the latter class; rejecting the
division of accidents into absolute and modal, they teach that all
accidents are mere _modifications_ or determinations of substance, that
they consist solely of various locations and combinations of the ultimate
parts of a substance, or relations of the latter to other substances.”

Now all _extrinsic denominations_ of a substance do seem on analysis
ultimately to resolve themselves partly into relations of the latter to
other substances, and partly into modal or absolute accidents of other
substances. Hence we may confine our attention here to the distinction
between these two classes of accident and their connatural substances.


    And, approaching this question, it will be well for us to bear two
    things in mind. In the first place, our definitions both of
    substance and of accident are abstract and generic or universal.
    But the abstract and universal does not exist _as such_. The
    concrete, individual, actually existing substance is never
    _merely_ “a being that naturally exists in itself,” nor is the
    accident of such a substance _merely_ a verification of its
    definition as “a being that naturally inheres in something else”.
    In every case what really and actually exists is _the individual_,
    a being concreted of substance and accidents, a being which is
    ever and always a _real unity_, composite no doubt, but really
    one; and this no matter what sort of distinction we hold to obtain
    between the substance and its accidents. This is important; its
    significance will be better appreciated according as we examine
    the distinctions in question. Secondly, as scholastics understand
    a real distinction, this can obtain not merely between different
    “persons” or “things” which are separate from one another in time
    or space, but also between different constitutive principles of
    any one single concrete, composite, individual being ( ). We have
    seen that they are not agreed as to whether the essence and the
    existence of any actual creature are really distinct or not ( ).
    And it may help us to clear up our notion of “accident” if we
    advert here to their discussion of the question whether or not an
    accident ought to be regarded as having an existence of its own,
    an existence proper to itself.

    Those who think that the distinction between essence and existence
    in created things is a real distinction, hold that accidents as
    such have no existence of their own, that they are actualized by
    the existence of the substance, or rather of the concrete,
    composite individual; that since the latter is a real unity—not a
    mere artificial aggregation of entities, but a being naturally
    one—it can have only one existence: _Impossibile est quod unius
    rei non sit unum esse_;( ) that by this one existence the
    concrete, composite essence of the substance, as affected and
    determined by its accidents, is actualized. They contend that if
    each of the principles, whether substantial or accidental, of a
    concrete individual being had its own existence, their union, no
    matter how intimate, could not form a natural unitary being, an
    individual, but only an aggregate of such beings. It is neither
    the matter, nor the form, nor the corporeal substance apart from
    its accidents, that exists: it is the substance completely
    determined by all its accidents and modes that is the proper
    subject of existence.( ) It alone is actualized, and that by
    _one_ existence, which is the “ultimate actuality” of the
    concrete, composite, individual essence: _esse est ultimus actus_.
    Hence it is too, they urge, that an accident should be conceived
    not properly as “a being,” but only as that whereby a being is
    such or such: Accidens non est ens, sed _ens entis_. But it cannot
    be so conceived if we attribute to it an existence of its own; for
    then it would be “a being” in the full and proper sense of the
    word.

    This is the view of St. Thomas, and of Thomists generally. The
    arguments in support of it are serious, but not convincing. And
    the same may be said of the reasons adduced for the opposite view:
    that existence not being really distinct from essence, accidents
    in so far as they can be said to have an essence of their own have
    likewise an existence of their own.

    Supporters of this view not only admit but maintain that the
    entity of a real, existing accident is a “diminished” entity,
    inasmuch as it is dependent in a sense in which a really existing
    substance is not dependent. They simply deny the Thomist assertion
    that substantial and accidental principles cannot combine to form
    a real and natural unit, an individual being, if each be accorded
    an existence appropriate and proportionate to its partial essence;
    nor indeed can Thomists _prove_ this assertion. Moreover, if
    existence be not _really_ distinct from essence, there is no more
    inconvenience in the claim that partial existences can combine to
    form one complete existence, _unum esse_, than in the Thomist
    claim that partial essences, such as substantial and accidental
    constitutive principles, can combine to form one complete essence,
    one individual subject of existence. Then, furthermore, it is
    urged that the substance exists prior _in time_ to some of its
    accidents; that it is prior _in nature_ to its properties, which
    are understood to _proceed_ or _flow_ from it; and that therefore
    its existence cannot be theirs, any more than its essence can be
    theirs. Finally, it is pointed out that since existence is the
    actuality of essence, the existence which actualizes a substance
    cannot be identical with that which actualizes an accident. At all
    events, whether the one existence of the concrete individual
    substance as determined by its accidents be as it were a simple
    and indivisible existential act, which actualizes the composite
    individual subject, as Thomists hold, or whether it be a composite
    existential act, really identical with the composite individual
    subject, as in the other view,( ) this concrete existence of the
    individual is constantly varying with the variation of the
    accidents of the individual. This is equally true on either view.


Inquiring into the distinction between substance and its intrinsic
accidents, whether modal or absolute, we have first to remark that all
accidents cannot possibly be reduced to relations; for if relation itself
is something _extrinsic_ to the things related, it must at least
presuppose a real and _intrinsic_ foundation or basis for itself in the
things related. Local motion, for instance, is a change in the spatial
relations of a body to other bodies. But it cannot be _merely_ this. For
if spatial relations are not mere subjective or mental fabrications, if
they are in any intelligible sense _real_, then a change in them must
involve a change of _something intrinsic_ to the bodies concerned. Now
Descartes, in denying the existence of _absolute_ accidents, in reducing
all accidents to _modes_ of substances, understood by modes not any
_intrinsic_ determinations of substance, but only extrinsic determinations
of the latter. All accidents of _material_ substance were for him mere
locations, arrangements, dispositions of its extended parts: extension
being its essence. Similarly, all accidents of spiritual substance were
for him mere modalities and mutual relations of its “thought” or
“consciousness”: this latter being for him the essence of spirit. We have
here not only the error of identifying or confounding accidents such as
thought and extension with their connatural substances, spirit and matter,
but also the error of supposing that extrinsic relations and modes of a
substance, and changes in these, can be real, without there being in the
substances themselves any intrinsic, real, changeable accidents, which
would account for the extrinsic relations and their changes. If there are
no intrinsic accidents, really affecting and determining substances, and
yet really distinct from the latter, then we must admit either that all
change is an illusion or else that all change is substantial; and this is
the dilemma that really confronts the Cartesian philosophy.

 . MODAL ACCIDENTS AND THE MODAL DISTINCTION.—The real distinction which
we claim to exist between a substance and its intrinsic accidents is not
the same in all cases: in regard to some accidents, which we have called
intrinsic modes of the substance, it is a _minor_ or _modal_ real
distinction; in regard to others which we have called absolute accidents,
it is a _major_ real distinction ( ). Let us first consider the former.

The term _mode_ has a variety of meanings, some very wide, some
restricted. When one concept determines or limits another in any way we
may call it a mode of the latter. If there is no real distinction between
the determining and the determined thought-object, the mode is called a
_metaphysical_ mode: as rationality is of animality in man. Again, created
things are all “modes” of being; and the various aspects of a creature may
be called “modes” of the latter: as “finiteness” is a mode of every
created being. We do not use the term in those wide senses in the present
context. Here we understand by a mode some positive reality which so
affects another and distinct reality as to determine the latter
proximately to some definite way of existing or acting, to which the
latter is itself indifferent; without, however, adding to the latter any
new and proper entity other than the said determination.( ) Such modes
are called _physical_ modes. And some philosophers maintain that there are
not only _accidental_ modes, thus really distinct from the substance, but
that there are even some _substantial_ modes really distinct from the
essence of the substance which they affect: for instance, that the really
distinct constitutive principles of any individual corporeal substance,
matter and form, are actually united only in virtue of a substantial mode
whereby each is ordained for union with the other; or that _subsistence_,
whereby the individual substance is made a subsistent and incommunicable
“person” or “thing,” is a substantial mode of the individual nature.( )
With these latter we are not concerned here, but only with accidental
modes, such as external shape or figure, local motion, position,
action,( ) etc. Now when a substance is affected by such accidents as
these it is impossible on the one hand to maintain that they add any new
positive entity of their own to it; they do not seem to have any reality
over and above the determination or modification in which their very
presence in the substance consists. And on the other hand it cannot be
denied that they express some real predicate which can be affirmed of the
substance in virtue of their presence in it, and that independently of our
thought; in other words it cannot be maintained that they are mere
figments or forms of thought, mere _entia rationis_. If a piece of wax has
a certain definite shape, this shape is inseparable from the wax: it is
nothing except in the wax, for it cannot exist apart from the wax; but in
the wax it is something in some real sense distinct from the wax, inasmuch
as the wax would persist even if it disappeared. No doubt it is essential
to the wax, as extended in space, to have some shape or other; but it is
indifferent to any particular shape, and hence something distinct from it
is required to remove this indifference. This something is the particular
shape it actually possesses. The shape, therefore, is an accidental mode
of the extension of the wax, a mode which is really distinct, by a minor
real distinction, from this extension which is its immediate subject.( )
Hence we conclude that there are accidental modes, or modal accidents,
really distinct from the subjects in which they inhere.

 . DISTINCTION BETWEEN SUBSTANCE AND ITS “PROPER” ACCIDENTS. UNITY OF THE
CONCRETE BEING.—Turning next to the distinction between absolute accidents
and substance, we have seen already that separable absolute accidents such
as acquired habits of mind and certain sensible qualities and energies of
bodies are really distinct from their subjects. Absolute accidents which
are _naturally inseparable_ from their subjects—such as external quantity
or spatial extension or volume is in regard to the corporeal substance—are
also really distinct from their subjects; though we cannot know by reason
alone whether or how far such accidents are _absolutely separable_ from
these subjects: from Christian Revelation we know that extension at least
is separable from the substance of a body, and with extension all the
other corporeal accidents which inhere immediately in extension.( )

But a special difficulty arises in regard to the nature of the distinction
between a substance and its _proper_ accidents,( ) _i.e._ those which
have such an adequate and necessary ground in the essence of the substance
that the latter cannot exist without them: accidents which are
simultaneous with the substance and proceed necessarily from it, such as
the internal quantity of a corporeal substance, or the intellectual and
appetitive powers or faculties of a spiritual substance. The medieval
scholastic philosophers were by no means unanimous as to the nature of
this distinction. Their discussion of the question centres mainly around
the distinction between the spiritual human soul and its spiritual
faculties, intellect and will, and between these faculties themselves. It
is instructive—as throwing additional light on what they understood by a
real distinction—to find that while Thomists generally have held that the
distinction here in question is a real distinction, many other scholastics
have held that it is only a virtual distinction, while Scotists have
generally taught that it is a formal distinction ( - ).

Kleutgen( ) interprets the formal distinction advocated by Scotus in the
present context as really equivalent to the virtual distinction. St.
Bonaventure, after referring to the latter distinction, and to the real
distinction propounded by St. Thomas, adopts himself an intermediate view:
that the faculties of the soul are indeed really distinct from one
another, but nevertheless are not really distinct, as accidental entities,
from the substance of the soul itself. We see how this can be by
considering that the material and formal principles which constitute a
corporeal substance, though really distinct from each other, are not
really distinct from the substance itself. They are not accidents of the
latter but _constitute_ its essence, and so are to be referred _reductivé_
to the category of substance. So, by analogy, the faculties of the soul,
though really distinct from each other, do not belong to any accidental
category really distinct from the substance of the soul, but belong
_reductivé_ to the latter category, not indeed as constituting, but as
flowing immediately and necessarily from, the substance of the soul
itself.( ) And, like St. Thomas, he finds the ultimate source and
explanation of this multiplicity of faculties and forces _in the
finiteness_ of the created substance as such.( ) But St. Thomas went
farther than St. Bonaventure, for he taught—as indeed Thomists generally
teach, and many who are not Thomists—that the faculties of the human soul
are really distinct from one another, not merely as proximate principles
of really distinct vital acts, but as accidental entities or essences; and
that as such they are really distinct from the essence or substance itself
of the human soul. The arguments in favour of this view will be given in
their proper place in connexion with the category of _Quality_. If they
are not demonstrative in their force, they are certainly such that the
view for which they make is very highly probable; but we are concerned
here to show, in this concluding section, that the recognition of a real
distinction in general between substance and its accidents does not in any
way compromise the real unity of the concrete individual being. It has
been widely accused of doing so by philosophers who try to discredit this
view without fully understanding it. This characteristically modern
attitude is illustrated by the persistent attempts that have been made in
recent times to throw ridicule on what they describe as the “faculty
psychology”.( )

The source of this groundless charge lies partly in the mistaken
conception of accident and substance as concrete entities superadded the
one to the other; partly in the mistaken notion that the union of
substance and accidents cannot result in a real unity, that there cannot
be more or less perfect grades of real unity ( ); and partly in the false
assumption that real distinction always implies mutual separability of
concrete entities. Of these errors we need only refer to that concerning
unity.

Modern philosophers not uncommonly conceive the union of substance and
accidents as being necessarily a mere _mechanical_ union or aggregation,
and oppose it to “organic” unity which they regard as a real unity
involving the richness of an energetic, “living” multiplicity. This
involves a misrepresentation of the traditional scholastic view. The union
of substance and accident is not a mechanical union. Nothing could be
farther from the minds of the scholastic interpreters of Aristotle than
the conception of the ultimate principles of the universe of our
experience as inert entities moved according to purely mechanical laws; or
of the individual concrete being as a mere machine, or a mere aggregate of
mechanical elements. They recognized even in the individual inorganic
substance an internal, unifying, active and directive principle of all the
energies and activities of the thing—its substantial form. And if this is
all those philosophers mean by the metaphorical transference of the terms
“organic unity,” “internal living principle of development,” etc., to the
mineral world, they are so far in accord with the traditional scholastic
philosophy;( ) while if they mean that all substances are principles of
“vital” energy, or that all reality is one organic unity, in the literal
sense of these terms, they are committing themselves either to the
palpably false theory of pan-psychism, or to the gratuitous reassertion of
a very old and very crude form of monism.

By “organic” unity we understand the unity of any living organism, a unity
which is much more perfect than that of the parts of a machine, or than
any natural juxtaposition of material parts in an inorganic whole; for the
organs, though distinct in number and in nature from one another, are
united by an internal principle to form one living individual, so that if
any organ were separated from the living organism it would cease to be an
organ.( ) But organic unity is not by any means the most perfect kind of
unity conceivable.( ) The living organism exists and develops and
attains to the perfection of its being only through a multiplicity of
integral parts extended in space. The spiritual substance is subject to no
such dispersion of its being. From its union with the faculties whereby it
attains to its natural development, there results a real unity of a higher
order than that of any organism.

And nevertheless, even though the unity of the concrete spiritual
substance and its faculties be so far higher than a mechanical or even an
organic unity, it is not perfect. Even though the faculties of the soul be
determinations of its substance, even though they flow from it as
actualities demanded by its essence for the normal and natural development
of its being, still it is a complete subsisting essence of its kind
without them; it possesses its _essential_ perfection without them, so
that however intimate be their union with it they can never form one
essence with it; it needs them only for the fuller development of its
being by acquiring further _intermediate_ perfections and thus attaining
to its _final_ perfection ( ).

And here we touch on the most fundamental ground of the distinction, in
all created things, between their substance and their accidental
perfections. Unlike the Necessary, Absolute Being, whose infinite
perfection is the eternal actuality of His essence, no creature possesses
the actuality of its being _tota simul_, but only by a progressive
development whereby it gradually acquires really new intermediate and
final perfections, really distinct from, though naturally due to, its
essence. Hence, even though some of its accidents—properties such as the
powers and faculties we have been discussing—be not really distinct from
the essence wherewith they are necessarily connected, this is not true of
its acquired habits and dispositions, or of the activities which proceed
from these latter as their proximate principles. At the same time the
concrete being is, at every moment of its existence and development, a
real unity, but a unity which, involving in itself as it does a real
multiplicity of distinct principles, must ever fall infinitely short of
the perfect type of real unity—that realized only in the Self-Existent,
Necessary Being.





CHAPTER IX. NATURE AND PERSON.


 . SOME DIVISIONS OF SUBSTANCES.—In the preceding chapter we discussed
the nature of substance and accident in general, and the relation between
a substance and its accidents. We must next examine the category of
substance more in detail, terminating as it does in the important concept
of personality or person. This latter conception is one which must have
its origin for all philosophers in the study of the human individual, but
which, for scholastic philosophers, is completed and perfected by the
light of Christian Revelation. We shall endeavour to show in the first
place what can be gathered from the light of reason about the constitution
of personality, and also briefly to note how Christian Revelation has
increased our insight into the perfections involved in it. As leading up
to the concept of person, we must set forth certain divisions or
classifications of substance: into _first_ and _second_ substances, and
into _complete_ and _incomplete_ substances.( )

(_a_) The specific and generic natures of substantial entities do not
inhere, like accidents, in individual substances; they constitute the
essence of the latter, and hence these _universals_ are called substances.
But the universal as such does not really exist; it is realized only in
individuals; in the logical order it pre-supposes the individual as a
logical subject of which it is affirmed, a _subjectum attributionis seu
praedicationis_. Hence it is called a _second_ substance, while the
individual substance is called a _first_ substance. Of course we can
predicate attributes of universal substances, and use these as logical
subjects, as when we say “_Man_ is mortal”. But such propositions have no
real meaning, and give us no information about reality, except in so far
as we can refer their predicates (“mortal”), through the medium of their
universal subjects (“man”), back ultimately to the individual substances
(John, James, etc.) which alone are real, and in which alone the universal
(“man”) has its reality. Hence the individual is, in the logical order,
the ultimate and fundamental subject of all our predications. And
furthermore, the individual substance cannot be used as a logical
predicate of anything underlying itself, while the universal substance can
be so used in relation to the individual.

In the ontological order, of course, the universal substance is
individualized, and, as individual, it is the subject in which all
accidents inhere, their _subjectum inhaesionis_: the _only_ subject of
many of them, and the _remote_ or _ultimate_ subject of those of them
which inhere _immediately_ in other accidents.

Thus while in the ontological order all substances, whether we think of
them as universal or as individual, are the ultimate subjects of inhesion
for all real accidents, in the logical order it is only the individual
substance that is the ultimate subject of attribution for all logical
predicates. Hence it was that the individual substance (τόδε τί ὄν),
vindicating for itself more fully the rôle of subject, was called by
Aristotle οὐσία πρώτη, _substantia prima_, while he called the universal,
specific or generic substance, οὐσία δεύτερα, _substantia secunda_.( )
These are, of course, two ways of regarding substance, and not two really
distinct species of substance as genus. The distinction between the
_membra dividentia_ is logical, not real.


    The perfectly intelligible sense in which Aristotle and the
    scholastics designate the universal a substance, the sense of
    moderate realism, according to which the universal constitutes,
    and is identical with, the essence of the individual “person” or
    “thing,” is entirely different from the sense in which many
    exponents of modern monistic idealism conceive the universal as
    the substance _par excellence_, the _ens realissimum_,
    determining, expressing, evolving itself in the individual
    phenomena of mind and of nature, which would be merely its
    manifestations.( )


(_b_) The divisions of substance into spiritual and corporeal, of the
latter into inorganic and organic, of these again into vegetative and
animal, and finally of animal substances into brute animals and human
beings,—offer no special difficulties. All purely natural or rational
knowledge of the possibility and nature of purely spiritual substances is
based on the analogy of our knowledge of the human soul, which, though a
spiritual substance, is not a pure spirit, but is naturally allied with
matter in its mode of existence. The individual human being offers to
human experience the sole example of the sufficiently mysterious
conjunction and combination of matter and spirit, of the corporeal mode of
being and the spiritual mode of being, to form one composite substance,
partly corporeal and partly spiritual.

(_c_) This in turn suggests the division of substances into _simple_ and
_composite_. The latter are those which we understand to be constituted by
the natural and substantial union of two really distinct but incomplete
substantial principles, a formative, determining, specifying principle,
and a material, determinable, indifferent principle: such are all
corporeal substances whether inorganic, vegetative, sentient, or rational.
The former, or simple substances, are those which we understand to be
constituted by a sole and single substantial principle which determines
and specifies their essence, without the conjunction of any material,
determinable principle. We have no direct and immediate experience of any
_complete_ created substance of this kind; but each of us has such direct
experience of an _incomplete_ simple substance, _viz._ his own soul; while
we can infer from our experience the _existence_ of other incomplete
simple substances, _viz._ the formative principles of corporeal
substances, as also the _possibility_ of such complete simple substances
as pure spirits, and the actual _existence_ of the perfectly simple,
uncreated substance of the Infinite Being.

(_d_) If there are such things as composite substances, _i.e._ substances
constituted by the substantial union of two really distinct principles,
then it follows that while the composite substance itself is _complete_,
each of its substantial constitutive principles is _incomplete_. Of course
there are many philosophers nowadays who reject as mere mental fictions,
as products of mere logical distinctions, and as devoid of objective
validity, the notions of _composite_ substance and _incomplete_ substance.
Nor is this to be wondered at when we remember what a variety of
groundless and gratuitous notions are current in regard to substance
itself ( ). But understanding substance in the traditional sense already
explained ( ), there is nothing whatever inconsistent in the notion of a
composite substance, or of an incomplete substance,—provided these notions
are understood in the sense to be explained presently. Nay, more, not only
are these notions intrinsically possible: we must even hold them to be
objectively valid and real, to be truly expressive of the nature of
reality, unless we are prepared to hold that there is no such thing as
substantial change in the universe, and that man himself is a mere
_aggregate_ of material atoms moved according to mechanical laws and
inhabited by a conscious soul, or thinking principle, rather than an
individual being with one definite substantial nature.

What, then, are we to understand by complete and incomplete substances
respectively? A substance is regarded as complete in the fullest sense
when it is wanting in no _substantial_ principle without which it would be
incapable of _existing_ and discharging _all_ its functions in the actual
order as an individual of some definite species. Of course no created
substance exists or discharges its functions unless it is endowed with
some accidents, _e.g._ with properties, faculties, forces, etc. But there
is no question of these here. We are considering only the essential
perfections of the substance. Thus, then, any existing individual of any
species—a man, a horse, an oak—is a complete substance in this fullest
sense. It is complete _in the line of substance_, in _substantial_
perfection, “_in ordine substantialitatis_,” inasmuch as it can exist (and
does actually exist) without being conjoined or united substantially with
any other substance to form a composite substance other than itself. And
it is complete _in the line of specific perfection_, “_in ordine
speciei_,” because not only can it exist without such conjunction with any
other substantial principle, but it can discharge _all_ the functions
natural to its species, and thus tend towards its _final_ perfection ( )
without such conjunction.

But it is conceivable that a substance might be complete in the line of
substantial perfections, and thus be capable of _existing_ in the actual
order and discharging there _some_ of the functions of its species without
conjunction with any other substantial principle, and yet be incapable of
discharging _all_ the functions natural to an individual of its species
without conjunction with some other substantial principle, in which case
it would be _incomplete_ in the line of _specific_ perfection, though
complete in everything pertaining to its _substantiality_. We know of one
such substance,—the human soul. Being spiritual and immortal, it can exist
apart from the body to which it is united by nature, and in this separated
condition retain and exercise its spiritual faculties of intellect and
will; it is therefore complete as regards the distinctively substantial
perfection whereby it is “capable of existing in itself”. But being of its
nature destined for union with a material principle, constituting an
individual of the human species only by means of such union, and being
capable of discharging some of the functions of this species, _viz._ the
sentient and vegetative functions, only when so united, it has not _all_
the perfections of its species independently of the body; and it is
therefore an incomplete substance in the line of specific perfections,
though complete in those essential to its substantiality.

Again, if it be true that just as man is composed of two substantial
principles, soul and body, so every living thing is composed of a
substantial vital principle and a substantial material principle, and that
every inorganic individual thing is likewise composed of two really
distinct substantial principles, a formative and a passive or material
principle; and if, furthermore, it be true that apart from the spiritual
principle in man every other vital or formative principle of the composite
“things” of our experience is of such a nature that it cannot actually
exist except in union with some material principle, and _vice versa_,—then
it follows necessarily that all such substantial principles of these
complete composite substances are themselves _incomplete_ substances: and
incomplete not only in regard to perfections which would make them
subsisting individuals of a species, but (unlike the human soul)
incomplete even in the line of substantiality itself, inasmuch as no one
of them is capable of actually existing at all except in union with its
connatural and correlative principle.

Thus we arrive at the notion of substances that are _incomplete_ in the
line of specific perfections, or in that of substantial perfections, or
even in both lines. An incomplete substance, therefore, is not one which
verifies the definition of substance only in part. The incomplete
substance _fully_ verifies the definition of a substance.( ) It is
conjoined, no doubt, _with another_ to form a complete substance; but it
does not exist _in the other_, or in the composite substance, as accidents
do. It is _a substantial_ principle of the composite substance, not an
_accidental_ determination of the latter, or of the other substantial
principle with which it is conjoined. It thus verifies the notion of
substance as a mode of being which naturally exists in itself; and united
with its correlative substantial principle it discharges the function of
supporting all accidental determinations which affect the composite
substantial essence. Since, however, it does not exist itself
independently as an individual of a species, but only forms the complete
individual substance by union with its correlative substantial principle,
it may be, and has been, accurately described as not belonging to the
category of substance _formally_, but only _referentially_, “_reductivé_”.

The concepts of composite substance, of complete and incomplete
substances, understood as we have just explained them, are therefore
perfectly intelligible in themselves. And this is all we are concerned to
show in the present context. This is not the place to establish the theses
of psychology and cosmology from which they are borrowed. That the human
soul is spiritual and immortal; that its union with a really distinct
material principle to form the individual human substance or nature is a
substantial union; that all living organisms and all inorganic bodies are
really composite substances and subject to substantial change: these
various theses of scholastic philosophy we here assume to be true. And if
they are true the conception of incomplete substances naturally united to
form a complete composite substance is not only intelligible as an
hypothesis but is objectively true and valid as a thesis; and thus the
notion of an incomplete substance is not only a consistent and legitimate
notion, but is also a notion which gives mental expression to an objective
reality.

We may add this consideration: The concept of an accident really distinct
from its substance involves no intrinsic repugnance. Yet an accident is a
mode of being which is so weak and wanting in reality, if we may speak in
such terms, that it cannot naturally exist except by inhering, mediately
or immediately, in the stronger and more real mode of being which is
substance. But an incomplete substance is a higher grade of reality than
any accident. Therefore if accidents can be real, _a fortiori_ incomplete
substances can be real.

 . SUBSTANCE AND NATURE.—We have already pointed out ( ) that the terms
“essence,” “substance,” and “nature” denote what is really the same thing,
regarded under different aspects. The term “essence” is somewhat wider
than “substance,” inasmuch as it means “what a thing is,” whether the
thing be a substance, an accident, or a concrete existing individual
including substance and accidents.

The traditional meaning of the term “nature” in Aristotelian and
scholastic philosophy is unmistakable. It means the essence or substance
of an individual person or thing, regarded as _the fundamental principle
of the latter’s activities_. Every finite individual comes into existence
incomplete, having no doubt its _essential_ perfections and properties
_actually_, but its _intermediate_ and _final_ perfections only
_potentially_ ( ). These it realizes gradually, through the exercise of
its connatural activities. Every being is essentially intended for
activity of some sort: “Omne ens est propter suam operationem,” says St.
Thomas. And by the constant interplay of their activities these beings
realize and sustain the universal order which makes the world a _cosmos_.
There is in all things an immanent purpose or finality which enables us to
speak of the whole system which they form as “Universal _Nature_”.( )

Therefore what we call a _substance_ or _essence_ from the _static_ point
of view we call a _nature_ when we consider it from the _dynamic_
standpoint, or as an agent.( ) No doubt the forces, faculties and
powers, the active and passive accidental principles, whereby such an
agent exerts and undergoes action, are the _proximate_ principles of all
this action and change, but the _remote_ and fundamental principle of the
latter is the essence or substance of the agent itself, in other words its
_nature_.


    Not all modern scholastics, however, are willing thus to identify
    nature with substance. We have no intuitive insight into what any
    real essence or substance is; our knowledge of it is discursive,
    derived by inference from the phenomena, the operations, the
    conduct of things, in accordance with the principle, _Operari
    sequitur esse_. Moreover, the actually existing, concrete
    individual—a man, for instance—has a great variety of activities,
    spiritual, sentient, vegetative, and inorganic; he has, moreover,
    in the constitution of his body a variety of distinct organs and
    members; he assimilates into his body a variety of inorganic
    substances; the tissues of his body _appear_ to be different _in
    kind_; the vital functions which subserve nutrition, growth and
    reproduction are at least analogous to mechanical, physical and
    chemical changes, if indeed they are not really and simply such;
    it may be, therefore, that the _ultimate material_ constituents of
    his body remain _substantially unaltered_ in their passage into,
    and through, and out of the cycle of his vegetative life; that
    they retain their elemental _substantial forms_ while they assume
    a _new nature_ by becoming parts of the one organic whole, whose
    higher directive principle dominates and co-ordinates all their
    various energies.( ) If this be so there is in the same
    individual a multiplicity of really and actually distinct
    substances; each of these, moreover, has its own existence
    proportionate to its essence, since the existence of a created
    reality is not really distinct from its essence; nor is there any
    reason for saying that any of these substances is incomplete; what
    we have a right to say is that no one of them separately is a
    complete _nature_, that each being an _incomplete nature_ unites
    with all the others to form one _complete nature_: inasmuch as no
    one of them separately is an adequate intrinsic principle of all
    the functions which it can discharge, and is naturally destined to
    discharge, by its natural union with the others, whereas there
    results from their union a _new fundamental principle_ of a
    co-ordinated and harmonized system of operations—in a word, a _new
    nature_.

    This line of thought implies among other things (_a_) the view
    that whereas there is no ground for admitting the existence of
    _incomplete substances_, there is ground for distinguishing
    between _complete and incomplete natures_; (_b_) the view that
    from the union or conjunction of an actual multiplicity of
    substances, each remaining unaltered and persisting in its
    existence actually distinct from the others, there _can_ arise one
    single complete nature—a nature which will be _one being_ simply
    and really, _unum ens per se et simpliciter_, and not merely an
    aggregate of beings or an accidental unity, _unum per
    accidens_,—and there _does_ arise such a nature whenever the
    component substances not merely co-operate to discharge certain
    functions which none of them could discharge separately (which
    indeed is true of an accidental union, as of two horses drawing a
    load which neither could draw by itself), but when they unite in a
    more permanent and intimate way according to what we call “natural
    laws” or “laws of nature,” so as to form a new fundamental
    principle of such functions.( ) These views undoubtedly owe
    their origin to the belief that certain facts brought to light by
    the physical and biological sciences in modern times afford strong
    evidence that the elementary material constituents of bodies,
    whether inorganic or living, remain _substantially unaltered_
    while combining to form the multitudinous _natural kinds_ or
    _natures_ of those living or non-living material things. It was to
    reconcile this supposed _plurality_ of _actually distinct_ and
    _diverse_ substances in the individual with the indubitable _real
    unity_ of the latter, that these philosophers distinguished
    between substance and nature. But it is not clear that the facts
    alleged afford any such evidence. Of course if the philosopher
    approaches the consideration of it with what we may call the
    atomic preconception of material substances as permanent,
    unchangeable entities, this view will preclude all recognition of
    _substantial_ change in the universe; it will therefore force him
    to conclude that each individual, composite agent has a unity
    which must be _less_ than substantial, and which, because he feels
    it to be _more_ than a mere accidental or artificial unity, he
    will describe as _natural_, as a union to form _one nature_. But
    if he approach the evidence in question with the view that
    substantial change is possible, this view, involving the
    recognition of incomplete substances as real, will remove all
    necessity for distinguishing between substance and nature, and
    will enable him to conclude that however various and manifold be
    the activities of the individual, their co-ordination and
    unification, as proceeding from the individual, point to a
    _substantial_ unity in the latter as their fundamental principle,
    a unity resulting from the _union of incomplete substances_.

    This latter is undoubtedly the view of St. Thomas, of practically
    all the medieval scholastics, and of most scholastics in modern
    times. Nor do we see any sufficient reason for receding from it,
    or admitting the modern distinction between substance and nature.
    And if it be objected that the view which admits the reality of
    incomplete substances and substantial change is as much a
    preconception as what we have called the atomic view of substance,
    our answer is, once more, that since we have no intellectual
    intuition into the real constitution of the substances which
    constitute the universe, since we can argue to this only by
    observing and reasoning from their activities on the principle
    _Operari requitur esse_, the evidence alone must decide which view
    of these substances is the correct one. Does the evidence afforded
    us by a scientific analysis of all the functions, inorganic,
    vegetative, sentient and rational, of an individual man, forbid us
    to conclude that he is one complete substance, resulting from the
    union of two incomplete substantial principles, a spiritual soul
    and a material principle? and at the same time compel us to infer
    that he is one complete nature resulting from the union of a
    plurality of principles supposed to be complete as substances and
    incomplete as natures? We believe that it does not; nor can we see
    that any really useful purpose is served by thus setting up a real
    distinction between substance and nature. From the evidence to
    hand it is neither more nor less difficult to infer unity of
    substance than unity of nature in the individual. The inference in
    question is an inference from facts in the phenomenal order, in
    the domain of the senses, to what must be actually there in the
    noumenal order, in the domain of nature or substance, a domain
    which cannot be reached by the senses but only by intellect. Nor
    will any imagination images which picture for us the physical
    fusion or coalescence of material things in the domain of the
    senses help us in the least to conceive in any positive way the
    mode in which incomplete natures or substances unite to form a
    complete nature or substance. For these latter facts belong to the
    domain which the senses cannot reach at all, and which intellect
    can reach only inferentially and not by direct insight.

    Hence we consider the view which regards real unity of nature as
    compatible with real and actual plurality of complete substances
    in the individual, as improbable. At the same time we do not
    believe that this view is a necessary corollary from the real
    identification of essence with existence in created things. We
    have seen that even if accidents have their own existence in so
    far as they have their own essence—as they have if essence and
    existence be really identical—nevertheless the concrete substance
    as determined by its accidents can have a really unitary
    existence, _unum esse_ corresponding to and identical with its
    composite constitution ( ). Similarly, if the existence of each
    incomplete substance is identical with its incomplete essence,
    this is no obstacle to the complete substance—which results from
    the union of two such incomplete substantial principles—having one
    complete unitary existence identical with its composite essence.
    Hence it is useless to argue against the view that a plurality of
    actually distinct and complete substances can unite to form a
    complete nature which will be really _one being_, on the ground
    that each complete substance has already its own existence and
    that things which have and preserve their own existence cannot
    form _one being_. Such an argument is inconclusive; for although
    _one being_ has of course only one existence, it has not been
    proved that this one existence cannot result from the union of
    many incomplete existences: especially if these existences be
    identical with the incomplete essences which are admittedly
    capable of uniting to form one complete essence.

    It may, however, be reasonably urged against the opinion under
    criticism that, since the complete substances are supposed to
    remain complete and unchanged in their state of combination, it is
    difficult to see how this combination can be a real union and not
    merely an extrinsic juxtaposition,—one which remains in reality a
    merely accidental conjunction, even though we may dignify it with
    the title of a “natural union”.

    And finally it may be pointed out that in this view the operations
    of the individual have not really _one ultimate_ intrinsic
    principle at all, since behind the supposed unity of nature there
    is a more fundamental plurality of actually distinct substances.


 . SUBSISTENCE AND PERSONALITY.—We have already examined the relation
between the individual and the universal, between _first_ and _second_
substances, in connexion with the doctrine of Individuation ( - ). And we
then saw that whatever it be that individuates the universal nature, it is
at all events not to be regarded as anything extrinsic and superadded to
this nature in the individual, as anything really distinct from this
nature: that, for instance, what makes Plato’s human nature to be Plato’s
is not anything really distinct from the human nature that is in Plato. We
have now to fix our attention on the nature as individualized. We have to
consider the complete individual nature or substance itself in actually
existing individual “things” or “persons”.

We must remember that scholastics are not agreed as to whether there is a
real distinction or only a virtual distinction between the actual
existence and the complete individual essence or substance or nature of
created individual beings ( - ). Furthermore we have seen that
philosophers who study the metaphysics of the inorganic world and of the
lower forms of life are unable to say with certainty what is the
individual in these domains: whether it is the chemical molecule or the
chemical atom or the electron; whether it is the single living cell or the
living mass consisting of a plurality of such cells ( ). But we have also
seen that as we ascend the scale of living things all difficulty in
designating the genuine individual disappears: that a man, a horse, an oak
tree, are undoubtedly individual beings.

Bearing these things in mind we have now to inquire into what has been
called the _subsistence_ or _personality_ of the complete individual
substance or nature: that perfection which enables us formally to
designate the latter a “subsisting thing”( ) or a “person”. By
personality we mean the subsistence of a complete individual _rational_
nature. We shall therefore inquire into the meaning of the generic term
_subsistentia_ (or _suppositalitas_), _subsistence_, in the abstract. But
let us look at it first in the concrete.

A complete individual nature or substance, when it exists in the actual
order, really distinct and separate in its own complete entity from every
other existing being, exercising its powers and discharging its functions
of its own right and according to the laws of its own being, is said to
_subsist_, or to have the perfection of _subsistence_. In this state it
not only _exists in itself_ as every substance does; it is not only
_incommunicable_ to any other being as every individual is, in
contradistinction with _second_ or _universal_ substances which are, as
such, indefinitely communicable to individuals; but it is also a complete
whole, incommunicable _as a mere integral or essential part_ to some other
whole, unlike the incomplete substantial constituents, or integral parts,
members or organs of, say, an individual organic body; and finally it is
incommunicable in the sense that it is not capable of being assumed into
the subsisting unity of some other superior “suppositum” or “person”. All
those characteristics we find in the individual “subsisting thing” or
“person”. It “exists in itself” and is not communicable to another
substance _as an accident_, because it is itself a substance. It is not
communicable _to individuals as a universal_, because it is itself an
individual. It is not communicable _as an integral or essential part to a
whole_, because it is itself a complete substance and nature.( ) Finally
it is not communicable to, and cannot be assumed into, the unity of a
higher personality so as to subsist by virtue of the latter’s subsistence,
because it has a perfection incompatible with such assumption, _viz._ its
own proper subsistence, whereby it is already an actually subsisting thing
or person in its own right, or _sui juris_, so to speak.


    The mention of this last sort of incommunicability would be
    superfluous, and indeed unintelligible, did we not know from
    Divine Revelation that the human nature of our Divine Lord and
    Saviour, Jesus Christ, though it is a complete and most perfect
    individual nature, is nevertheless _not a person_, because It is
    assumed into the Personality of the Second Person of the Divine
    Trinity, and, united hypostatically or personally with this Divine
    Person, subsists by virtue of the Divine Subsistence of the
    latter.


We see, therefore, what subsistence does for a complete individual nature
in the _static_ order. It makes this nature _sui juris_, incommunicable,
and entirely independent in the mode of its actual being: leaving
untouched, of course, the essential dependence of the created “subsisting
thing” or “person” on the Creator. In the _dynamic_ order, the order of
activity and development, subsistence makes the complete individual nature
not only the ultimate principle _by which_ all the functions of the
individual are discharged, but also the ultimate principle or agent
_which_ exercises these functions: while the nature _as such_ is the
ultimate _principium_ QUO, the nature _as subsisting_ is the ultimate
_principium_ QUOD, in regard to all actions emanating from this nature.
Hence the scholastic aphorism: _Actiones sunt suppositorum_. That is, all
actions emanating from a complete individual nature are always ascribed
and attributed to the latter _as subsisting_, to the “subsisting thing” or
“person”. In regard to an individual human person, for instance, whether
his intellect thinks, or his will resolves, or his imagination pictures
things, or his eyes see, or his hand writes, or his stomach digests, or
his lungs breathe, or his head aches, it is the _man_, the _person_,
properly, that discharges or suffers all these functions, though by means
of different faculties, organs and members; and it is to him properly that
we ascribe all of them.( )

Now the individual human person is neither his soul, nor his body, nor
even both conceived as two; he is _one_ being, one complete substance or
nature composed partly of a spiritual principle or soul and partly of a
material principle which the soul “informs” and so constitutes a living
human body. Hence the human soul itself, whether we consider it as united
to the material principle in the living human person, or as disembodied
and separate from its connatural material principle, is not a complete
substance, is not capable of _subsisting_ and having its human activities
referred ultimately to itself as the subsisting, personal principle which
elicits these activities. No doubt the disembodied soul has actual
_existence_, but it has not the perfection of _subsistence_ or
_personality_: it is not a complete individual of the human species to
which it belongs, and therefore it cannot be properly called a human
person, a complete subsisting individual of the human species.( )


    Furthermore, even though an individual nature be complete as a
    nature, endowed with all the substantial and specific perfections
    which constitute it a complete individual of the species to which
    it belongs, nevertheless if it is assumed into the personality of
    another and higher nature, and subsists in personal union with the
    latter and by virtue of the latter’s subsistence, then that
    nature, not having its own proper and connatural subsistence, is
    not itself a person. Nor can the actions which are elicited by
    means of it be ascribed ultimately to it; they must be ascribed to
    the person by whose subsistence it subsists and into whose
    personality it has been assumed. If an individual human nature be
    thus hypostatically or personally assumed into, and united with, a
    higher Divine Personality, and subsists only by this Personality,
    such a human nature will be really and truly an individual nature
    of the human species; the actions elicited through it and
    performed by means of it will be really and truly human actions;
    but it will not be a human person; while its actions will be
    really and truly the actions of the Divine Person, and will
    therefore be also really and truly divine: they will be the
    actions of the God-Man, divine and human, _theandric_. All this we
    know only from Divine Revelation concerning the hypostatic union
    of the human nature of Christ with the Person of the Divine Word;
    nor could we know it otherwise. But all this does not modify, it
    only supplements and completes, what the light of reason discloses
    to us regarding the subsistence or personality of any complete
    individual nature.


We are now in a position to give nominal definitions of subsistence and
personality both in the abstract and in the concrete, _i.e._ definitions
which will indicate to us what exactly it is that these terms denote,( )
and which will thus enable us to inquire into their connotation, or in
other words to ask what is it precisely that constitutes subsistence or
personality.

By “_subsistence_” (“_subsistentia_,” “_suppositalitas_”) we mean that
perfection whereby a fully complete individual nature is rendered in every
way, in its being and in its actions, distinct from and incommunicable to
any and every other being, so that it exists and acts _sui juris_,
autonomously, independently of every other being save the Creator.( )

By a “_subsisting being_” in the concrete (ὑπόστασις, “_suppositum_,”
_hypostasis_), we mean a being endowed with this perfection of
subsistence; in other words, a being that is a complete individual nature
existing and acting in every way distinct from and incommunicable to any
other being, so that it exists and acts _sui juris_, autonomously.

“_Personality_” is simply the subsistence of a complete individual nature
that is _rational_, _intelligent_.

A “_person_” is simply a _subsisting_ nature that is _rational_,
_intelligent_: _Persona est suppositum rationale_. The definition given by
Boëtius is classic: “_Persona est substantia individua_ RATIONALIS
_naturae_”: “the individual substance of a rational nature,”—where the
term _individual_ is understood to imply _actually existing and
subsisting_.

The special name which has thus been traditionally applied to _rational_
or _intelligent_ subsisting beings (as distinct from animals, plants, and
material “things”)—the term “person” (“_persona_,” a mask: _per-sonus_;
_cf._ Gr. προσωπέιον, from προσώπον, the face, countenance)—originally
meaning a rôle or character in a drama, came to be applied to the
subsisting human individual, and to connote a certain dignity of the
latter as compared with the lower or non-rational beings of the universe.
And in fact the ascription of its actions to the subsisting being is more
deeply grounded in the subsistence of rational, intelligent beings, who,
as free agents, can more properly direct and control these actions.( )

 . DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE INDIVIDUAL NATURE AND ITS SUBSISTENCE. WHAT
CONSTITUTES PERSONALITY?—Knowing now what we mean by the terms
“subsistence,” “suppositum,” “person,” and “personality,” we have next to
inquire in what precisely does subsistence consist. What is it that
constitutes a complete individual nature a “subsisting being,” or if the
nature be rational, a “person”? Subsistence connotes, over and above the
mode of “existing in itself” which characterizes all substance, the notion
that the substance or nature is individual, that it is complete, that it
is in every way incommunicable, that it is _sui juris_ or autonomous in
its existence and activities. These notions are all positive; they imply
positive perfections: even incommunicability is really a positive
perfection though the term is negative. But is any one of the positive
perfections, thus contained in the notion of subsistence, a positive
something _over and above_, and _really distinct from_, the perfection
already implied in the concept of _a complete individual nature as such_?

Some of those philosophers who regard the distinction between essence and
existence in creatures as a real distinction, identify the _subsistence_
of the complete individual nature with its _actual existence_, thus
placing a real distinction between nature and subsistence or
personality.( ) Apart from these, however, it is not likely that any
philosophers, guided by the light of reason alone, would ever have held,
or even suspected, that the subsistence of an actually existing individual
nature is a positive perfection really distinct from, and superadded to,
the latter. For we never, in our natural experience, encounter an existing
individual substance, or nature, or agent, that is not distinct,
autonomous, independent, _sui juris_, and incommunicable in its mode of
being and acting.


    Rigorously, however, this would only prove that subsistence is a
    perfection _naturally inseparable_ from the complete individual
    nature; _conceivably_ it _might_ still be _really_ distinct from
    the latter. But whether or not such real distinction could be
    suspected by the unaided light of reason working on natural
    experience, at all events what we know from Divine Revelation
    concerning the hypostatic union of the human nature of our Lord
    Jesus Christ with the Person of the Divine Word, enables us to
    realize that there _can_ be, in the actual order of things, a
    complete individual nature which is not a “subsisting being” or
    “person”; for the human nature of our Lord is _de facto_ such a
    nature,—and _ab actu ad posse valet consecutio_. This information,
    however, is not decisive in determining the character of the
    distinction between the individual substance or nature and its
    subsistence.


It may be that the complete individual nature is _eo ipso_ and identically
a “subsisting being” or “person,” that it is always independent,
autonomous, _sui juris_, by the very fact that it is a complete individual
nature, _unless it is_ DE FACTO _assumed into the personality of a higher
nature_, so that in this intercommunication with the latter, in the unity
of the latter’s personality, it is not independent, autonomous, _sui
juris_, but dependent, subordinate, and _alterius juris_. In this
condition, it loses nothing positive by the fact that it is not now a
person and has not its own subsistence; nor does it gain any _natural_
perfection, for it was _ex hypothesi_ complete and perfect _as a nature_;
but it gains something _supernatural_ inasmuch as it now subsists in a
manner wholly undue to it.( ) According to this view, therefore,
subsistence would not be a perfection really distinct from the complete
individual nature; it would be a mentally distinct aspect of the latter, a
positive aspect, however, consisting in this nature’s completeness, its
self-sufficing, autonomous character, and consequent
incommunicability.( )


    The principal difficulty against this view is a theological
    difficulty. As formulated by Urraburu,( ) it appears to involve
    an ambiguity in the expression “substantial union”. It is briefly
    this: If the subsistence proper to a complete individual nature
    adds no positive perfection to the latter, so that the latter
    necessarily subsists and is a person unless it is actually assumed
    into a higher personality, and by the very fact that it is not
    actually so assumed, then the human nature of Christ “is as
    complete in every way and in every line of substantial perfection,
    by virtue of its own proper entity, when actually united with the
    Divine Person, as it would be were it not so united, or as the
    person of Peter, or Paul, or any other human person is”. But this
    implies that there are in Christ “two substances complete in every
    respect”. Now between two such substances “there cannot be a
    substantial union,” a union which would constitute “one being,”
    “unum per se ens”. Hence the view in question would appear to be
    inadmissible.

    But it is not proved that the union of “two substances complete in
    every respect” cannot result in the constitution of a being that
    is really and genuinely one—“unum per se ens”—_in the case in
    which the union is a personal union_. The hypostatic union of the
    human nature of Christ with the Divine Person is primarily a
    _personal_ union whereby the former nature subsists by and in the
    Divine Personality. It has the effect of constituting the united
    terms “one subsisting being,” and therefore has supereminently, if
    not formally, the effect of a “substantial union”. Nay, it is a
    “substantial” union in the sense that it is a union of two
    substances, not of a substance and accidents; and also in the
    sense that it is not a mere accidental aggregation or artificial
    juxtaposition of substances, resulting merely in the constitution
    of collective or artificial unity, a _unum per accidens_. But is
    it a “substantial” union in the sense that it is such a union of
    substances as results in one “nature”? Most certainly not; for
    this was the heresy of the Monophysites: that in Christ there is
    only one nature resulting from the union of the human nature with
    the Divine. If then, with Urraburu, we mean by “nature” simply
    “substance regarded as a principle of action” ( ), and if,
    furthermore, the hypostatic union does not result in one “nature,”
    neither does it result in one “substance,” nor can it be a
    “substantial” or “natural” union in this sense.( ) He does not
    say, of course, that the hypostatic union is a “substantial union”
    which results in “one nature,” or even explicitly that it results
    in “one substance,” but he says that the two substances are
    “substantially conjoined,” “substantialiter conjunguntur”; and he
    continues, “a substantial union is such a conjunction of two
    substantial realities that there results from it one substantial
    something, which is truly and properly one”—“unio enim
    substantialis, est talis duarum rerum substantialium conjunctio,
    per quam resultat unum aliquid substantiale quod vere et proprie
    sit unum,”( )—and he concludes that “there is something
    substantial wanting in the human nature of Christ, _viz._
    personality, which, of course, is most abundantly supplied in the
    hypostatic union by the Divine Person”—“reliquum est, ut naturae
    humanae in Christo aliquid desit substantiale, nempe personalitas,
    quod per unionem hypostaticam cumulatissime suppleatur a
    Verbo.”( ) Now, this “aliquid substantiale” cannot be “aliquid
    naturale” in the sense that it is something _constitutive_ of the
    human substance or nature; for the human substance or nature of
    Christ is certainly complete and perfect as a substance or nature.
    It must be some complement or mode, that is naturally due to it,
    but supernaturally supplied by the Person of the Divine Word.( )
    This brings us to the view that subsistence is a something
    positive, distinct in some real way, and not merely in our
    concepts, from the complete individual substance.


According to the more common view of catholic philosophers (and
theologians) subsistence is some positive perfection really distinct from
the complete individual nature. But the supporters of this general view
explain it in different ways. We have already referred to the view of
certain Thomists who, identifying _subsistence_ with the _actual
existence_ of the complete substance or nature, place a real distinction
between the existence and the substance or nature. Other Thomists, while
defending the latter distinction, point out that actual existence confers
no real perfection, but only actualizes the real; they hold, therefore,
that subsistence is not existence, but is rather a perfection of the real,
essential, or substantial order, as distinct from the existential order—a
perfection presupposed by actual existence, and whose proper function is
to _unify_ all the substantial constituents and accidental determinations
of the individual substance or nature, thus making it a really unitary
being—“unum ens per se”—proximately capable of being actualized by the
simple existential act: which latter is the ultimate actuality of the real
being: _esse est ultimus actus_.( )

The concrete individual nature, containing as it does a plurality of
really distinct principles, substantial and accidental, needs some
unifying principle to make these one incommunicable reality, proximately
capable of receiving a corresponding unitary existential act: without such
a principle, they say, each of the substantial and accidental principles
in the concrete individual nature would have its own existence: so that
the result would be not _really_ one being, but a being really _manifold_
and only accidentally one—“unum per accidens”. This principle is
_subsistence_.


    The human nature of our Divine Lord has not its own connatural
    subsistence; this is supplied by the subsistence of the Divine
    Person. Moreover, since the human nature in question has not its
    own subsistence, neither has it its own existence; existence is
    the actuality of the subsisting being; therefore there is in
    Christ but one existence, that of the Divine Person, whereby also
    the human nature of Christ exists.( )


Of those who deny that the distinction between the existence and the
essence of any created nature is a real distinction, some hold in the
present matter the Scotist view that subsistence is not a positive
perfection really distinct from the complete individual nature. Others,
however, hold what we have ventured to regard as the more common view:
that personality is something positive and really distinct from nature.
But they explain what they conceive subsistence to be without any
reference to existence, and without distinguishing between the essential
and the existential order of reality.

The most common explanation seems to be that subsistence is a unifying
principle of the concrete individual nature, as stated above. Thus
conceived, it is not an _absolute_ reality; nor is the distinction between
it and the nature a _major_ real distinction. It is a _substantial mode_
( ), naturally superadded to the substance and modally distinct from the
latter. It so completes and determines the substance or nature that the
latter not only exists in itself but is also, by virtue of this mode,
incommunicable in every way and _sui juris_.( ) It gives to the
substance that ultimate determinateness which an accidental mode such as a
definite shape or location gives to the accident of quantity.( )


    This mode is absent (supernaturally) from the human nature of our
    Divine Lord; this nature is therefore communicable; and the
    Personality of the Divine Word supernaturally supplies the
    function of this absent natural mode.


It must be confessed that it is not easy to understand how this or any
other _substantial_ mode can be _really_ distinct from the substance it
modifies. And in truth the distinction is not real in the full sense: it
is not between _thing_ and _thing_, _inter rem et rem_. All that is
claimed for it is that it is not merely mental; that it is not merely an
_ens rationis_ which the mind projects into the reality; that it is a
positive perfection of the nature or substance, a perfection which, though
naturally inseparable from the latter, is not absolutely inseparable, and
which, therefore, is _de facto_ supernaturally absent from the human
nature and replaced by the Divine Personality in the case of the
hypostatic union.

It belongs, moreover, to the order of substance, not to that of accidents:
the substantial mode differs from the accidental mode, or modal accident,
in this, that it gives to the substance some ultimate determining
perfection which appertains to the substance as such, and whereby the
substance is completed in the order of “existing in itself”. Subsistence
is not an accident, even though it supervenes on the complete nature, for
it determines the substance of the latter, not in relation to any line of
accidental activity, as a power or faculty, nor as something modifying it
accidentally, but as a mode which ultimately determines and perfects it in
the order of substantial reality itself, in the order of “existing in
itself” in such a full and perfect manner as to be _sui juris_ and
incommunicable.


    The main difficulty against this view is also theological: If
    subsistence is a positive perfection it either belongs to the
    complete individual nature or it does not; in the former case the
    humanity of Christ, assumed by the Divine Word, was not a complete
    human nature; in the latter case the individual human nature can
    exist without it: and both consequences are equally inadmissable.
    But it may be replied that, granting the first member of the
    disjunctive, the consequence inferred from it does not really
    follow: subsistence belongs to the complete individual nature as
    an ultimate natural complement; but when it is absent and supplied
    supernaturally by the Divine Personality the nature is still
    complete as a nature: it is wanting in no absolute or entitative
    perfection, but only in a modality which is supereminently
    supplied by the Divine Personality. Neither is the consequence
    from the second member of the disjunctive a valid inference. For
    though personality as a mode does not belong to the essence of an
    individual human nature, no such individual nature can exist
    without _some_ personality, either its own or another: just as
    extension cannot exist without _some_ shape, though any particular
    shape is not essential to it.


To sum up, then, the doctrine of the two preceding sections: What are we
to understand by a _person_, and by _personality_? Unquestionably our
conception of person and personality (concrete and abstract) is mainly
determined, and very rightly so, by an analysis of what constitutes the
actually existing individual of the human species. Whatever our concept
be, it must certainly be realized and verified in all human individuals:
these, before all other beings, must be included in the denotation of our
concept of person. In fact, for the philosopher, guided by the natural
light of reason alone, the term can have hardly any other connotation. He
will, no doubt, ascribe personality, as the highest mode of being he knows
of, to the Supreme Being; but he will here ascribe it only in an
analogical and supereminent way; and only from Divine Revelation can he
know that this Supreme Being has not a single but a threefold Personality.
Again, his consideration of the nature of the human soul as an embodied
substance which is nevertheless spiritual and immortal will enable him to
affirm the possibility of _purely spiritual_ created beings; and these he
will of course conceive as persons. But, conceiving the human soul itself
as a constituent principle of the human individual, he will not conceive
the soul itself as a person.

The philosopher who understands the traditional Aristotelian conceptions
of substance, of individual substance (_substantia prima_), of incomplete,
complete, and composite substances, of substance considered as _nature_ or
principle of action, of substance considered as _hypostasis_, as the
actually existing individual being which is the ultimate logical subject
of all predications and the ultimate ontological subject of all real
determinations: the philosopher who understands these concepts, and who
admits them to be validly grounded in experience, and to offer as far as
they go a correct interpretation of reality, will have no difficulty in
making up his mind about what is requisite to constitute a person.

Wherever he finds an existing individual being of any species, a being
which, even if it is really composite, is nevertheless really one, such a
being he will pronounce to be a “subsisting individual being”. He may not
be able, in the inorganic world or among the lower forms of life, to
distinguish for certain what is the real individual from what may be
perhaps only an accidental, if natural, colony or group of real
individuals. As a test he will always seek for the manifestation of an
internal directive principle whereby all the vital functions of the
organized mass of matter in question are co-ordinated in such a manner as
to make for the preservation, growth and development of the whole
throughout a definite life cycle from birth to death. This formative and
directive principle is evidence of an individual unity of nature and
subsistence; and such evidence is abundantly present in “individuals” of
all the higher species in botany and zoology. The “individual subsisting
being” will therefore be a “complete individual substance or nature,
existing and acting in every way distinct from and incommunicable to any
other being, so that it exists and acts _sui juris_, autonomously”.

If such an individual nature is not merely corporeal but organic or
animate, not merely animate but sentient, and not merely sentient but
_rational_ or _intelligent_, _i.e._ constituted at least in part by a
_spiritual substantial principle_ whereby the individual is _intelligent_
and _free_, then that individual is a person. Every individual of the
human species is such. And all that is essential to his complete
individual human nature enters into and constitutes his person in the
concrete. Not merely, therefore, his intellect and will; not merely his
soul considered as “mind,” _i.e._ as the basis and principle of his whole
conscious and subconscious psychic life; or also as the principle of his
merely organic life; or also as the actualizing principle of his corporeal
nature; but no less also the corporeal principle itself of his composite
being, the body itself with all its parts and members and organs: all
these without exception belong equally to the human person; all of them
without exception go to constitute the _Ego_.( ) This, which is the
Aristotelian and scholastic view of the human person, is in perfect accord
with the common-sense view of the matter as evidenced by the ordinary
usages of language. We speak intelligibly no less than correctly when we
say that a man’s body is part of his person as well as his soul or mind.
And we make a no less accurate, intelligible, and necessary distinction,
when we distinguish between all that which _constitutes_ the human person
and that _whereby we know_ ourselves and other human individuals to be
persons. Yet this distinction is not kept clearly in mind by many modern
philosophers, who, approaching the study of personality exclusively from
the side of what the individual consciousness testifies as to the unity
and continuity (or otherwise) of mental life in the individual, are
scandalized at the assertion that the human body can have anything to do
with human personality.

 . CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE PERSONAL SELF.—In order to form the concept of
person, and to find that concept verified in the data of our experience,
it is absolutely essential that we be endowed with the _faculty of
intelligence_, the spiritual power of forming abstract concepts; and
secondly, that having formed the concept of person as a “rational or
intelligent subsisting being,” we be capable, by the exercise of _reflex
consciousness_, to find in our own mental life the data from which we can
conclude that this concept of person is verified in each and every one of
ourselves. It is because we are endowed with intelligence that we can form
all the abstract notions—of substance, individual, subsistence, existence,
etc.,—which enter into and constitute our concept of person. And it is
because we can, by means of this faculty, reflect on our own mental
operations, and infer from them that each of us is a complete individual
rational nature subsisting independently and incommunicably, that we can
know ourselves to be persons.

How the human individual forms these concepts and finds them verified in
his own “self,” how he gradually comes into conscious possession of the
knowledge of his own individual being as an _Ego_, self, or person, are
problems for Psychology.( ) It will be sufficient here to point out that
there are grounds for distinguishing between the individual’s implicit
subjective awareness of his subsistence or “selfhood”—an awareness which
accompanies all his conscious mental functions, and which becomes more
explicit and definite as the power of introspection and reflex
consciousness develops—and the “_abstract quasi-objective notion_ of his
own _personality_ habitually possessed by every human being”.( )

The individual human being _immediately_ apprehends his own existence, and
his abiding unity or sameness throughout incessantly changing states, in
the temporal series of his conscious activities; but his knowledge of the
_nature_ of his own being can be the result only of a long and carefully
conducted analysis of his own activities, and of inferences based on the
character of these activities. The former or implicit knowledge of the
self in the concrete is direct and intuitive. The individual _Ego_
apprehends _itself_ in _its states_. This knowledge comes mainly from
within, and is subject to gradual development. Father Maher thus describes
how the child comes gradually into possession of it:—


    As thoughts of pleasures and pains repeated in the past and
    expected in the future grow more distinct, the dissimilarity
    between these and the permanent abiding self comes to be more
    fully realized. Passing emotions of fear, anger, vanity, pride, or
    sympathy, accentuate the difference. But most probably it is the
    dawning sense of power to resist and overcome rising impulse, and
    the dim nascent consciousness of responsibility, which lead up to
    the final revelation, until at last, in some reflective act of
    memory or choice, or in some vague effort to understand the
    oft-heard “I,” the great truth is manifested to him: the child
    enters, as it were, into possession of his personality, and knows
    himself as a _Self-conscious Being_. The _Ego_ does not _create_
    but _discovers_ itself. In Jouffroy’s felicitous phrase, it
    “breaks its shell,” and finds that it is _a Personal Agent with an
    existence and individuality of its own_, standing henceforward
    alone in opposition to the universe.( )


After this stage is reached, the human individual easily distinguishes
between the “self” as the _cause_ or _subject_ of the states, and the
states as _modifications_ of the self. This distinction is implicit in the
concomitant awareness of self which accompanies all exercise of direct
cognitive consciousness. It is explicit in all deliberate acts of reflex,
introspective self-consciousness. The data from which we form the abstract
concepts of substance, nature, individual, person, self, etc., and from
which we arrive by reasoning at a philosophical knowledge of the nature
and personality of the human individual, are furnished mainly by
introspection; but also in part by external observation of the universe
around us.

Concomitantly, however, with the process by which we become implicitly but
immediately aware of the _Ego_ or self as an abiding self-identical person
in and through our own mental activity, we gradually form a
quasi-objective and historical view of our own personality as one of a
number of similar personalities around us in the universe. This view, says
Father Maher,


    gathers into itself the history of my past life—the actions of my
    childhood, boyhood, youth, and later years. Interwoven with them
    all is the image of my bodily organism, and clustering around are
    a fringe of recollections of my dispositions, habits, and
    character, of my hopes and regrets, of my resolutions and
    failures, along with a dim consciousness of my position in the
    minds of other selves.

    Under the form of a representation of this composite art, bound
    together by the thread of memory, each of us ordinarily conceives
    his complete abiding _personality_. This idea is necessarily
    undergoing constant modification; and it is in comparing the
    present form of the representation with the past, whilst adverting
    to considerable alterations in my character, bodily appearance,
    and the like, that I sometimes say: “I am completely changed,” “I
    am quite another person,” though I am, of course, convinced that
    it is the same “I” who am changed in accidental qualities. _It is
    because this complex notion of my personality is an abstraction
    from my remembered experiences __ that a perversion of imagination
    and a rupture of memory can sometimes induce the so-called
    _“illusions or alterations of personality”_._( )


When we remember that this objective conception of the self is so
dependent on the function of memory, and that the normal exercise of this
faculty is in turn so dependent on the normal functioning of the brain and
the nervous system,( ) we can hazard an intelligible explanation of the
abnormal facts recorded by most modern psychologists concerning hypnotism,
somnambulism and “double” or “multiple” consciousness.( ) Father Maher,
ascribing these phenomena partly to dislocations of memory, partly to
unusual groupings of mental states according to the laws of mental
association—groupings that arise from peculiar physiological connexions
between the various neural functionings of the brain centres,—and partly
to semi-conscious or reflex nerve processes, emphasizes an important fact
that is sometimes lost sight of: the fact that some section at least of
the individual’s conscious mental life is common to, and present
throughout, the two or more “states” or “conditions” between which any
such abnormal individual is found to alternate. This consideration is
itself sufficient to disprove the theory—to which we shall presently
refer—that there is or may be in the individual human being a double, or
even a multiple “human personality”.

 . FALSE THEORIES OF PERSONALITY.—It is plain that conscious _mental
activity_ cannot _constitute_ human personality, or subconscious mental
activity either, for all activity is of the accidental mode of being, is
an _accident_, whereas a person must be a _substance_. Of course it is the
self-conscious cognitive activity of the human individual that _reveals_
to the latter his own self as a person: it is the exercise of reflex
consciousness combined with memory that gives us the feeling of personal
identity with ourselves throughout the changing events of our mental and
bodily life. Furthermore, this self-consciousness has its root in the
_rational_ nature of the human individual; and rationality of nature is
the differentiating principle which makes the subsisting individual a
“person” as distinct from a (subsisting) “thing”. But then, it is not the
feeling of personal identity that _constitutes_ the person. Actual
consciousness is neither the essence, nor the source, nor even the index
of personality; for it is only an activity, and an activity which reveals
immediately not the _person_ as such, but the _nature_ as rational;( )
nor does the rational (substantial) principle of a composite nature
constitute the latter a person; but only the subsistence of the complete
(composite) individual nature itself.

These considerations are sufficiently obvious; they presuppose, however,
the truth of the traditional doctrine already explained in regard to the
existence, nature and cognoscibility of _substance_. Philosophers who have
misunderstood and rejected and lost this traditional doctrine of substance
have propounded many varieties of unsatisfactory and inconsistent theories
in regard to what constitutes “person” and “personality”. The main feature
of all such theories is their identification of personality with the
habitual consciousness of self, or habitual feeling of personal identity:
a feeling which, however, must be admitted to include _memory_ in some
form, while the function of memory in any shape or form cannot be
satisfactorily explained on any theory of the human _Ego_ which denies
that there is a human _substance_ persisting permanently as a unifying
principle of successive mental states ( - ).

So far as English philosophy is concerned such theories appear to have had
their origin in Locke’s teaching on person and personal identity.
Discussing the notions of identity and diversity,( ) he distinguishes
between the identity of an individual substance with itself in its
duration throughout time, and what he terms personal identity; while by
identity in general he means not abstract identity but the concrete
permanence of a thing throughout time ( ). On this we have to call
attention to the fact that just as _duration_ is not essential to the
_constitution_ of a substance, so neither is it essential to the
constitution of a complete subsisting individual substance or person ( );
though it is, of course, an essential condition for all human apprehension
whether of substance or of person. Locke was wrong, therefore, in
confounding what reveals to us the abiding permanence, identity or
sameness of a subsisting thing or person (whether the “self” or any other
subsisting thing or person) throughout its duration in time, with what
constitutes the subsisting thing or person.

Furthermore, his distinction between substantial identity, _i.e._ the
sameness of an individual substance with itself throughout time, and
personal identity or sameness, was also an error. For as long as there is
_substantial_ unity, continuity, or identity of the subsisting individual
substance, so long is there unity, continuity, or identity of its
subsistence, or of its personality if it be a rational substance. The
_subsistence_ of a complete individual inorganic substance is changed as
soon as the individual undergoes _substantial_ change: we have them no
longer _the same_ subsisting individual being. So, too, the subsistence of
the organic individual is changed as soon as the latter undergoes
_substantial_ change by the dissolution of life, by the separation of its
formative and vital substantial principle from its material substantial
principle: after such dissolution we have no longer _the same_ subsisting
plant or animal. And, finally, the subsistence of an individual man is
changed, or interrupted, or ceases by death, which separates his soul, his
vital principle, from his body. We say, moreover, that in the latter case
the human _person_ ceases to exist when the identity or permanence of his
subsisting substance or nature terminates at death; for _personal
identity_ we hold to be the identity of the complete subsisting substance
or nature with itself. But Locke, who practically agrees with what we have
said regarding the abiding identity of the subsisting individual being
with itself—whether this individual be an inorganic individual, a plant, a
brute beast, or a man( )—distinguishes at this point between identity of
the subsisting individual substance and _personal_ identity.

Of identity in general he says that “to conceive and judge of it aright,
we must consider what idea the word it is applied to stands for; it being
one thing to be the same substance, another the same man, and a third the
same person, if person, man, and substance, are three names standing for
three different ideas”.( ) And, struggling to dissociate “person” from
“substance,” he continues thus:—


    To find wherein personal identity consists, we must consider what
    person stands for; which, I think, is a thinking, intelligent
    being, that has reason and reflection, and can consider itself as
    itself, the same thinking thing in different times and places;
    which it does only by that consciousness which is inseparable from
    thinking, and, as it seems to me, essential to it. When we see,
    hear, smell, taste, feel, meditate, or will any thing, we know
    that we do so. Thus it is always as to our present sensations and
    perceptions, and by this every one is to himself what he calls
    self; it not being considered in this case whether the same self
    be continued in the same or divers substances. For since
    consciousness always accompanies thinking, and it is that which
    makes every one to be what he calls self, and thereby
    distinguishes himself from all other thinking things; in this
    alone consists personal identity, _i.e._ the sameness of a
    rational being: and as far as this consciousness can be extended
    backwards to any past action or thought, so far reaches the
    identity of that person; it is the same self now it was then; and
    it is by the same self with this present one that now reflects on
    it, that that action was done.( )


The definition of person in this passage as “a thinking, intelligent
being,” etc., is not far removed from our own definition; but surely
conscious thought is not “that which _makes_ every one to be what he calls
self,” seeing that conscious thought is only an _activity_ or _function_
of the “rational being”. It is conscious thought, of course, including
memory, that _reveals_ the “rational being” to himself as a self, and as
the same or identical self throughout time; but unless the “rational
being,” or the “thinking, intelligent being, that has reason and
reflection,” etc.—which is Locke’s own definition of “person”—were there
all the time identical with itself, exercising those distinct and
successive acts of consciousness and memory, and unifying them, how could
these acts _even reveal_ the “person” or his “personal identity” to
himself, not to speak of their _constituting_ personality or personal
identity? It is perfectly plain that these acts _presuppose_ the “person,”
the “thinking, intelligent being,” or, as we have expressed it, the
“subsisting, rational, individual nature” _already constituted_; and it is
equally plain that the “personal identity” which they _reveal_ is
_constituted by_, and _consists simply in_, the duration or continued
existence of this same subsisting individual rational nature; nor could
these acts reveal any identity, personal or otherwise, unless they were
the acts of one and the same actually subsisting, existing and persisting
substance.

Yet Locke thinks he can divorce personal identity from identity of
substance, and account for the former independently of the latter. In face
of the obvious difficulty that actual consciousness is not continuous but
intermittent, he tries to maintain that the consciousness which links
together present states with remembered states is sufficient to constitute
personal identity even although there may have intervened between the
present and the past states a complete change of substance, so that it is
really a different substance which experiences the present states from
that which experienced the past states. The question


    Whether we are the same thinking thing, _i.e._ the same substance
    or no ... concerns not personal identity at all: the question
    being, what makes the same person, and not whether it be the same
    identical substance, which always thinks in the same person:
    different substances, by the same consciousness (where they do
    partake in it), being united into one person, as well as different
    bodies by the same life are united into one animal, whose identity
    is preserved, in that change of substances, by the unity of one
    continued life ... [for] animal identity is preserved in identity
    of life, and not of substance.( )


Here the contention is that we can have “the same person” and yet not
necessarily “the same identical substance,” because _consciousness_ may
give a personal unity to distinct and successive substances in the
individual man just as _animal life_ gives an analogous unity to distinct
and successive substances in the individual animal. This is very
superficial; for it only substitutes for the problem of human personality
the similar problem of explaining the unity and sameness of subsistence in
the individual living thing: a problem which involves the fact of _memory_
in animals. For scholastic philosophers unity of life in the living thing,
involving the fact of memory in animals, is explained by the perfectly
intelligible and will-grounded teaching that there is in each individual
living thing a _formative and vital principle_ which is _substantial_, a
_forma substantialis_, which unites, in the _abiding self-identical unity
of a complete individual composite substance_, the material principle of
the corporeal substances which thus go, in the incessant process of
substantial change known as metabolism, to form partially, and to support
the substantial continuity of, the living individual. While the latter is
thus in constant process of material, or partial, substantial change, it
remains, as long as it lives, the same complete individual substance, and
this in virtue of the abiding _substantial_ formative and vital principle
which actuates and animates it. The abiding permanence or self-identity of
the _subsisting individual substance_ which feels or thinks, and
remembers, is an intelligible, and indeed the only intelligible, ground
and explanation of memory, and of our consciousness of personal identity.

But if we leave out of account this abiding continuity and self-identity
of the subsisting individual substance or nature, which is the subject,
cause and agent of these acts of memory and consciousness, how can these
latter, in and by themselves, possibly form, or even indeed reveal to us,
our personal identity? Locke felt this difficulty; and he tried in vain to
meet it: in vain, for it is insuperable. He merely suggests that “the same
consciousness ... can be transferred from one thinking substance to
another,” in which case “it will be possible that two thinking substances
may make [successively] one person”.( ) This is practically his last
word on the question,—and it is worthy of note, for it virtually
_substantializes consciousness_. It makes consciousness, which is really
only an act or a series of acts, a _something substantial and subsisting_.
We have seen already how modern phenomenists, once they reject the notion
of substance as invalid or superfluous, must by that very fact
equivalently _substantialize accidents_ ( ); for substance, being a
necessary category of human thought as exercised on reality, cannot really
be dispensed with. And we see in the present context an illustration of
this fact. The abiding self-identity of the human person cannot be
explained otherwise than by the abiding self-identical subsistence of the
individual human substance.

If personal identity were constituted and determined by consciousness, by
the series of conscious states connected and unified by memory, then it
would appear that the human being in infancy, in sleep, in
unconsciousness, or in a state of insanity, is not a human person!
Philosophers who have not the hardihood to deny human personality to the
individual of the human species in these states, and who on the other hand
will not recognize the possession of a _rational nature_ or substance by
the subsisting individual as the ground of the latter’s personality and
personal identity, have recourse to the hypothesis of a _sub-conscious_,
or “_sub-liminal_” _consciousness_ in the individual, as a substitute. If
by this they merely meant an abiding _substantial_ rational principle of
all mental activities, even of those which may be semi-conscious or
sub-conscious, they would be merely calling by another name what we call
the _rational nature_ of man. And the fact that they refer to this
principle as the sub-conscious “self” or “Ego” shows how insistent is the
rational need for rooting personality and personal identity in something
which is a _substance_. But they do not and will not conceive it as a
substance; whereas if it is not this, if it is only a “process,” or a
“function,” or a “series” or “stream” of processes or functions, it can no
more constitute or explain, or even reveal, personal identity, than a
series or stream of _conscious_ states can.( )

Unable as he was to explain how the same consciousness could persist
throughout a succession of really and adequately distinct substances
(except by virtually substantializing consciousness), Locke nevertheless
persisted in holding that consciousness and consciousness alone (including
memory, which, however, is inexplicable on any other theory than that of a
subsisting and persisting substance or nature which remembers),
constitutes personality and personal identity. We have dwelt upon his
teaching mainly because all modern phenomenists try to explain personality
on the same principles—_i.e._ independently of the doctrine of substance.


    As a corollary from his doctrine he inferred that if a man
    completely and irrevocably loses consciousness [or rather memory]
    of his past life, though he remains the same “man” he is no longer
    the same “person”: “if it be possible for the same man to have
    distinct incommunicable consciousness at different times, it is
    past doubt the same man would at different times make different
    persons”;( ) and he goes on in this sense to give a literal
    interpretation to the modes of speech we have referred to
    above.( ) He likewise admitted that two or more “persons,”
    _i.e._ consciousnesses, can be linked with the same individual
    human being, or the same individual human soul, alternately
    appearing and disappearing, giving place successively to one
    another. When any one of these “personalities” or consciousnesses
    ceases to be actual, it must in Locke’s view cease to be in any
    sense real: so that there could not be two or more personalities
    at the same time in the same individual human being. Modern
    psychologists, however, of the phenomenist school, convinced that
    sub-conscious mental activities are not only possible, but that
    the fact of such activities is well established by a variety of
    experiences, have extended Locke’s conception of personality (as
    actual consciousness) to embrace groups of mental activities which
    may emerge only intermittently “above the threshold of
    consciousness”. Hence they explain the abnormal cases of double or
    multiple consciousness already referred to, as being
    manifestations of really distinct “personalities” in one and the
    same human individual. In normal human beings there is, they say,
    only one normally “conscious personality”. The sub-conscious
    mental activities of such an individual they bulk together as
    forming this individual’s “sub-liminal” or “sub-conscious” _Ego_
    or “self”: presumably a distinct personality from the conscious
    one. In the abnormal cases of “double-consciousness” the
    subliminal self struggles for mastery over the conscious self and
    is for a time successful: the two personalities thus for a time
    changing places as it were. In the rarer or more abnormal cases of
    treble or multiple consciousness, there are presumably three or
    more “personalities” engaged in the struggle, each coming to the
    surface in turn and submerging the others.

    It is not the fancifulness of this theory that one might object to
    so much as its utter inadequacy to explain the facts, nay, its
    utter unintelligibility _on the principles of those who propound
    it_. For we must not lose sight of the fact that it is propounded
    by philosophers who purport to explain mental life and human
    personality without recourse to a _substantial soul_, to any
    _substantial_ basis of mental life, or indeed to the concept of
    _substance_ at all: by philosophers who will talk of a mental
    process without admitting mind or soul as a _substance_ or
    _subject_ of that process, of a “series” or “stream” of mental
    functions or activities without allowing any _agent_ that would
    exercise those functions, or any _substantial abiding principle_
    that would unify the series or stream and know it as such;
    philosophers who regard the _Ego_, “self,” or “person,” as
    _nothing other than_ the group or series or stream of mental
    states, and not as anything of which these are the states; and,
    finally, who speak of these groups of functions or activities as
    “personalities”—which they describe as “struggling” with one
    another—apparently oblivious of the fact that by using such
    language they are _in their thought at least_ transforming these
    _activities_ into _agents_, these _states_ into _subjects of
    states_, in a word, these _accidents_ into _substances_; or else
    they are making their language and their thought alike
    unintelligible.( )

    Of course those numerous modern philosophers who, like James, try
    to “find a place for all the experiential facts unencumbered by
    any hypothesis [like that of an individual substantial soul,
    presumably] save that of passing states of mind” [_ibid._, p.
     ], do not really leave these “states” suspended in mid-air as
    it were. The imperative need for admitting the reality of
    substance always ultimately asserts itself: as when James
    recognizes the necessity of admitting something “more than the
    bare fact of co-existence of a passing thought with a passing
    brain-state” [_Principles of Psychology_, i., p.  —_apud_ MAHER,
    _ibid._, p.  ]. Only his speculation as to what constitutes this
    “something ‘more’ which lies behind our mental states” [_ibid._,
    p.  ] is not particularly convincing: “For my own part,” he
    says, “I confess that the moment I become metaphysical and try to
    define the _more_, I find the notion of some sort of an _anima
    mundi_ thinking in all of us to be a more promising hypothesis, in
    spite of all its difficulties, than that of a lot of absolutely
    individual souls” [_ibid._, p.  —apud MAHER, _ibid._]. This
    restatement of the medieval pantheistic theory known as Averroïsm,
    Monopsychism, or the theory of the _intellectus separatus_ [_cf._
    DE WULF, _History of Medieval Philosophy_, pp.   _sqq._], is a
    somewhat disappointing contribution to Metaphysics from the most
    brilliant of our modern psychologists. The “difficulties” of this
    “more promising hypothesis” had discredited it a rather long time
    before Professor James resurrected it [_cf._ criticisms—_apud_
    MAHER, _ibid._].





CHAPTER X. SOME ACCIDENT-MODES OF BEING: QUALITY.


 . ONTOLOGY AND THE ACCIDENT-MODES OF BEING.—Under the ultimate category
or _genus supremum_ of Substance experience reveals to us two broadly
distinct sub-classes: corporeal substances, “bodies” or “material” things,
and spiritual substances or “spirits”. Of these latter we have direct
experience only of one class, _viz._ _embodied_ spirits or human souls.
The investigation of the nature of these belongs to _Psychology_, and from
the data of that science we may infer, by the light of reason, the
_possibility_ of another class of spirits, _viz._ _pure_ spirits, beings
of whose actual existence we know from Divine Revelation. The existence of
a Supreme Being, Whom we must conceive analogically as substance and
spirit, is demonstrated by the light of reason in _Natural Theology_. The
investigation of the nature of corporeal substances belongs properly to
_Cosmology_. Hence in the present treatise we have no further direct
concern with the substance-mode of reality;( ) but only with its
accident-modes, and not with all of these.

Not with all of them; for those which belong properly to spiritual
substances, or properly to corporeal substances, call for special
treatment in Psychology and Cosmology respectively. In the main, only such
species of accidents as are common to matter and spirit alike, will form
the subject of the remaining portion of the present volume. Only the
broader aspects of such categories as Quality, Quantity and
Causality—aspects which have a more direct bearing on the Theory of Being
and the Theory of Knowledge in general,—call for treatment in General
Metaphysics. A more detailed treatment must be sought in other departments
of Philosophy.

 . NATURE OF THE ACCIDENT CALLED QUALITY.—In the widest sense of the
term, _Quality_ is synonymous with _logical attribute_. In this sense
whatever can be predicated of a subject, whatever _logically_ determines a
subject in any way for our thought is a quality or “attribute” of that
subject. In a sense almost equally wide the term is used to designate any
_real_ determination, whether substantial or accidental, of a subject. In
this sense the differential element, or _differentia specifica_,
determines the generic element, or genus, of a substance: it tells us what
_kind_ or _species_ the substance is: _e.g._ what kind of animal a man is,
_viz._ rational; what kind of living thing an animal is, _viz._ sentient;
what kind of body or corporeal thing a plant is, _viz._ living. And hence
scholastics have said of the predicable “_differentia specifica_” that it
is predicated adjectivally, or as a _quality_, to tell us in _what the
thing consists_, or what is its nature: differentia specifica praedicatur
_in quale quid_: it gives us the determining principle of the specific
nature. Or, again, quality is used synonymously with any _accidental_
determination of a substance. In this sense magnitude, location, action,
etc., though they determine a subject in different accidental ways,
nevertheless are all indiscriminately said to “qualify” it in the sense of
determining it somehow or other, and are therefore called “qualities” in
the wide sense of “accidents”. Hence, again, the scholastics have said
that inasmuch as all accidents determine or qualify their subjects, they
are predicated of these _qualitatively_, and may be called in a wide sense
“qualifications” or “qualities”: omnia genera accidentium qualificant
substantiam et praedicantur _in quale_.

It is in this wide sense that we use the term when we say that the
(specific) nature (or “kind”) of a thing is revealed by its “qualities”;
for the nature of a thing is revealed by all its accidents. And when we
infer the nature of a thing from its activities, in accordance with the
maxim _Qualis est operatio talis est natura_, we must take the term
“_operatio_” or “activity” to include the operation of the thing on our
cognitive faculties, the states of cognitive consciousness thus aroused in
us, and all the other accidents thus revealed to us in the thing by its
“knowledge-eliciting” action on our minds.

But the term _Quality_ has been traditionally restricted, after Aristotle,
to designate properly one particular category of accidents distinct from
the others and from substance.

A definition proper of any _genus supremum_ is of course out of the
question. But it is not easy to give even a description which will convey
an accurate notion of the special category of Quality, and mark it off
from the other accident-categories. If we say with Aristotle that quality
is “that whereby we are enabled to describe _what sort_ (ποιόν, _quale_)
anything is”( )—_e.g._ that it is white by whiteness, strong by
strength, etc.—we are only illustrating the abstract by the concrete. But
even this serves the purpose of helping us to realize what quality in
general means. For we are more familiar with the concrete than with the
abstract: and we can see a broad distinction between the question: “_What
sort_ is that thing? _Qualis_ est ista res?” (Quality), and the question:
“_How large_ is that thing? _Quanta_ est ista res?” (Quantity), or
“_Where_ is that thing?” (Place), or “What is it _doing_? What is
_happening_ to it?” (_Actio et Passio_), or “What does it _resemble_?”
(_Relation_), etc. This will help us to realize that there are accidental
modes of being which affect substances in a different way from all the
extrinsic denominations of the latter ( ), and also in a different way
from Quantity, Relation, and Causality; and these modes of being, whereby
the substance is _of such a sort_, or _in such a condition_, we call
_qualities_. And if we inquire what special kind of _determination_ of the
substance is common to qualities, and marks these off from the other
accidents, we shall find it to consist in this, that quality is an
accidental mode of being which so affects the substance that it disposes
the latter well or ill in regard to the perfections natural to this
particular kind of substance: it _alters_ the latter accidentally by
increasing or diminishing its natural perfection. We have seen that no
created substance has all the perfection natural to its kind, _tota simul_
or _ab initio_ ( ); that it fulfils its rôle in existence by development,
by tending towards its full or final perfection. The accidental realities
which supervene on its essence, and thus _alter_ its perfection _within
the limits of its kind or species_, are what we call qualities. They
diversify the substance accidentally in its perfection, in its concrete
mode of existing and behaving: by their appearance and disappearance they
do not change the _essential perfection_ of the substance ( ), they do
not effect a substantial change; but they change its intermediate,
accidental perfection; and this qualitative change is technically known
and described as _alteration_( ) ( ).

Hence we find _Quality_ described by St. Thomas as the sort of accident
which modifies or disposes the substance in itself: “_accidens
modificativum sen dispositivum substantiaein seipsa_,” and by Albertus
Magnus somewhat more explicitly as “the sort of accident which completes
and perfects substance in its existence and activity: _accidens complens
ac perficiens substantiam tarn in existendo quam in operando_”.( ) This
notion will be conveyed with sufficient clearness if we describe _Quality_
as _that absolute accident which determines a substance after the manner
of an accidental _“differentia,”_ affecting the essential perfection of
the substance in regard to its existence or to its activity_.

Hence ( ) the Pure Actuality of the Infinitely Perfect Being cannot admit
qualities, inasmuch as quality implies only a relative and limited
perfection; ( ) the qualities of a corporeal substance are grounded in the
_formative_ principle which gives that substance its specific nature and
is the principle of its tendency and development towards its final
perfection, whereas its _quantity_ is grounded in its determinable or
_material_ principle; ( ) the _essential_ differentiating principles of
substances—being known to us not intuitively, but only abstractively and
discursively, _i.e._ by inference from the behaviour of these substances,
from the effects of their activities—are often designated not by what
constitutes them intrinsically, but by the _accidental perfections_ or
_qualities_ which are our only key to a knowledge of them. For instance,
we differentiate the nature of man from that of the brute beast by
describing the former as _rational_: a term which really designates not
the essence or nature itself, but one of its fundamental qualities, _viz._
the faculty of reason.

 . IMMEDIATE SUB-CLASSES OF QUALITY AS _Genus Supremum_.—On account of
the enormous variety of qualities which characterize the data of our
experience, the problem of classifying qualities is not a simple one. Its
details belong to the special sciences and to the other departments of
philosophy. Here we must confine ourselves to an attempt at indicating the
immediate sub-classes of the _genus supremum_. And in this context it will
not be out of place to call attention to a remarkable, and in our view
quite erroneous, trend of modern thought. It accompanied the advent of
what is known as _atomism_ or _the mechanical conception of the universe_,
a conception much in vogue about half a century ago, but against which
there are already abundant evidences of a strong reaction. We refer to the
inclination of scientists and philosophers to eliminate Quality altogether
as an ultimately distinct category of human experience, by reducing all
qualities to _quantity_, _local relations_, and _mechanical_ or _spatial
motions_ of matter (_cf._  ). In this theory all the sensible qualities
of the material universe would be really and objectively nothing more than
locations and motions of the ultimate constituents of perceptible matter.
All the chemical, physical and mechanical energies or forces of external
nature would be purely quantitative dispositions or configurations of
matter in motion: realities that could be _exhaustively_ known by
mathematical analysis and measurement. And when it was found that
_qualitative_ concepts stubbornly resisted all attempts at elimination, or
reduction to _quantitative_ concepts, even in the investigation of the
material universe or external nature, scientists and philosophers of
external nature thought to get rid of them by locating them exclusively in
the human mind, and thus pushing them over on psychologists and
philosophers of the mind for further and final exorcism. For a time
extreme materialists, less wise than daring, endeavoured to reduce even
mind and all its conscious states and processes to a mere subjective
aspect of what, looked at objectively, would be merely matter in
motion.( ) It can be shown in Cosmology, Psychology, and Epistemology
that all such attempts to analyse qualities into something other than
qualities, are utterly unsatisfactory and unsuccessful. And we may see
even from an enumeration of some of the main classes of qualities that
such attempts were foredoomed to failure.

Scholastic Philosophy has generally adopted Aristotle’s division of
qualities into four great groups:( ) ( ) ἕξις ἢ διάθεσις, _habitus vel
dispositio_; ( ) δύναμις φυσικὴ ἢ ἀδυναμία, potentia _naturalis vel
impotentia_; ( ) ποιότητες παθητικαί καὶ πάθη, _potentiae passivae et
passiones_; ( ) μορφὴ ἢ σχῆμα, _forma vel figura_. St. Thomas offers the
following ground for this classification. Since quality, he says,( ) is
an accidental determination of the substance itself, _i.e._ of the
perfection of its concrete existence and activity, and since we may
distinguish four aspects of the substance: its nature itself as
perfectible; its intrinsic principles of acting and receiving action,
principles springing from the _formative_, specific constituent of its
nature; its receptivity of change effected by such action, a receptivity
grounded in the determinable or _material_ principle of its nature; and
finally its quantity, if it be a corporeal substance,—we can likewise
distinguish between ( ) _acquired habits or dispositions_, such as health,
knowledge, virtue, vice, etc., which immediately determine the perfection
of the substance, disposing it well or ill in relation to its last end;
( ) intrinsic _natural forces_, _faculties_, _powers of action_,
_aptitudes_, _capacities_, such as intellect, will, imagination, instinct,
organic vital forces, physical, chemical, mechanical energies; ( ) states
resulting in a corporeal being from the action of its _milieu_ upon it:
the _passions_ and emotions of sentient living things, such as sensations
of pleasure, pain, anger, etc.; the _sensible qualities_ of matter, such
as colour, taste, smell, temperature, feel or texture, etc.; and, finally
( ) the quality of _form or shape_ which is a mere determination of the
quantity of a corporeal substance.

This classification is not indeed perfect, for the same individual quality
can be placed in different classes when looked at from different
standpoints: heat, for instance, may be regarded as a _natural operative
power_ of a substance in a state of combustion, or as a _sensible quality_
produced in that substance by the operation of other agencies. But it has
the merit of being an exhaustive classification; and philosophers have not
succeeded in improving on it.

Qualities of the third and fourth class do not call for special treatment.
In the third class, Aristotle’s distinction between ποιότητες παθητικαί
(_qualitates passibiles_) and πάθη (_passiones_) is based upon the
relatively permanent or transient character of the quality in question.
The transient quality, such as the blush produced by shame or the pallor
produced by fear, would be a _passio_;( ) whereas the more permanent
quality, such as the natural colour of the countenance, would be a
_passibilis qualitas._ The “passions” or sensible changes which result
from certain conscious states, and affect the organism of the sentient
living being, are included in this class as _passiones_; while the visible
manifestations of more permanent mental derangement or insanity would be
included in it as _passibiles qualitates_. We may, perhaps, get a fairly
clear and comprehensive notion of all that is contained in this class as
“sensible qualities” by realizing that these embrace whatever is the
immediate _cause_ or the immediate _result_ of the _sense modification
involved in any act or process of sense consciousness_. Such “sensible
qualities,” therefore, belong in part to the objects which provoke sense
perception, and in part to the sentient subject which elicits the
conscious act. One of the most important problems in the Theory of
Knowledge, and one which ramifies into Cosmology and Psychology, is that
of determining the precise significance of these “sensible qualities,”—and
especially in determining whether they are qualities of an extramental
reality, or merely states of the individual mind or consciousness itself.

_Form_ or _figure_, which constitutes the fourth class of quality, is a
mode of the quantity of a body, being merely the particular surface
termination of its extension or volume. Considered as a mode of abstract
or mathematical quantity, it belongs to the domain of mathematics.
Considered in the concrete body, it is the physical, sensible form, shape,
or figure, of the latter; and here it may be either natural or artificial,
according as it results from the unimpeded action of natural forces or
from these forces as manipulated and directed by intelligent agents. It is
worthy of special note that while extension or volume is indicative of the
_material_ principle of corporeal substances, the figure or shape
naturally assumed by this volume is determined by their _formative_
principle, and is thus indicative of their specific nature. This is
already noticeable in the inorganic world, where many of the chemically
different substances assume each its own distinctive crystalline form. But
it is particularly in the domains of botany and zoology that the natural
external form of the living individual organism is recognized as one of
the most important grounds of its classification and one of the surest
tests of its specific nature.( )

 . HABITS AND DISPOSITIONS.—Every created being is subject to change,
capable of development or retrogression, endowed with a natural tendency
towards some end which it can reach by a natural process of activity, and
which constitutes for it, when attained, its full and final perfection
( ). Through this process of change it acquires accidental modes of being
which help it or hinder it, dispose it or indispose it, in the exercise of
its natural activities, and therefore also in the concrete perfection of
its nature as tending towards its natural end. Such an accidental mode of
being is acquired by a series of transient actions and experiences,
_actiones et passiones_: after these have passed away it remains, and not
merely as a state or condition resulting from the changes wrought in the
subject by these experiences, but as a _disposition_ towards easier
repetition of such experiences. Moreover, it may be not a mere transient
disposition, but something stable and permanent, not easily removed or
annulled, a _dispositio difficile mobilis_. And just as it is essentially
indicative of past actions whereby it was acquired, so, too, the very
_raison d’être_ of its actuality is to dispose its subject for further and
future changes, for operations and effects which are not yet actual but
only potential in this subject. Such an accidental mode of being is what
Aristotle called ἕξις, and the scholastics _habitus_. With Aristotle, they
define _habit_ as a _more or less stable disposition whereby a subject is
well or ill disposed in itself or in relation to other things_: _Habitus
dicitur dispositio difficile mobilis secundum quam bene vel male
disponitur subjectum aut secundum se aut in ordine ad aliud_.( )

The difference between a _habit_ (ἕξις) and a simple _disposition_
(διάθεσις) is that the former is by nature a more or less _stable_ quality
while the latter is unstable and transient. Moreover, the facilities
acquired by repeated action of the organs or members of men or animals,
and the particular “set” acquired by certain tools or instruments from
continued use, are more properly called _dispositions_ than _habits_: they
are not habits in the strict sense, though they are often called habits in
the ordinary and looser usage of common speech. A little reflection will
show that _the only proper subjects of natural habits in the strict sense
are the spiritual faculties of an intelligent and free agent_.

Since all natural habits are acquired by the past activities, and dispose
for the future activities, of a being not absolutely perfect, but partly
potential and partly actual, and subject to change, it follows that only
finite beings can have habits. But, furthermore, beings that are not free,
that have not control or dominion of their own actions, that have not
freedom of choice, are determined by their nature, by a necessary law of
their activity, to elicit the actions which they do actually elicit: such
beings are by their nature _determinata ad unumn_; they are confined
necessarily to the particular lines of action whereby they fulfil their
rôle in the actual order of things. As Aristotle remarks, you may throw
the same stone repeatedly in the same direction and with the same
velocity: it will never acquire a _habit_ of moving in that direction with
that velocity.( ) The same is true of plants and animals; for a habit in
the strict sense implies not merely a certain mutability in its subject;
it implies, and consists in, a stable modification of some power or
faculty _which can have its activities directed indifferently in one or
other of a variety of channels or lines_: the power or faculty which is
the proper subject of a habit must be a _potentia dirigibilis vel
determinabilis ad diversa_. Hence merely material powers of action—such as
the mechanical, physical and chemical forces of inorganic nature, or the
organic powers of living bodies, whether vegetative or merely
sentient,—since they are all _of themselves_, of _their nature_,
determined to certain lines of action, and to these only,—such powers
cannot become the subjects of habits, of stable dispositions towards one
line of action rather than another. “The powers of material nature,” says
St. Thomas, “do not elicit their operations by means of habits, for they
are of themselves [already adequately] determined to their particular
lines of action.”( )

Only the spiritual faculties of free agents are, then, the proper seat of
real habits. Only of free agents can we say strictly that “habit is second
nature”. Only these can direct the operations of their intellect and will,
and through these latter the operations of their sense faculties, both
cognitive and appetitive, in a way conducive to their last end or in a way
that deviates therefrom, by attaching their intellects to truth or to
error, their wills to virtue or to vice, and thus forming in these
faculties stable dispositions or _habits_.( )

Is there any sense, then, in which we can speak of the sentient (cognitive
and appetitive) and executive powers of man as the seat of habits? The
activities of those faculties are under the control of intellect and will;
the acts _elicited_ by the former are _commanded_ by the latter; they are
acts that issue primarily from the latter faculties; and hence the
dispositions that result from repetition of these acts and give a facility
for further repetition of them—acts of talking, walking, singing, playing
musical instruments, exercising any handicraft—are partly, though only
secondarily, _dispositions_ formed in these sentient faculties (the
“trained” eye, the “trained” ear, the “discriminating” sense of taste, the
“alert” sense of touch in the deaf, dumb, or blind), or in these executive
powers, whereby the latter more promptly and easily obey the “command” of
the higher faculties; but they are primarily and principally _habits_ of
these higher faculties themselves rendering the latter permanently “apt”
to “command” and utilize the subordinate powers in the repetition of such
acts.( )

Unquestionably the bodily organs acquire by exercise a definite “set”
which facilitates their further exercise. But this “set” is not something
that they can use themselves; nor is it something that removes or lessens
a natural indeterminateness or indifference of these powers; for they are
not indifferent: they _must_ act, at any instant, in the _one_ way which
their concrete nature in all its surroundings actually demands. They
themselves are only instruments of the higher faculties; these alone have
freedom of choice between lines of action; it is only the stable
modifications which these acquire, which they themselves can use, and
which _dispose_ them by lessening their indeterminateness, that are
properly called habits. There are, therefore, in the organic faculties of
man _dispositions_ which give facility of action. There are, moreover,
organic dispositions which dispose the organism not for _action_ but for
its union with the _formative principle_ or soul: _habituales
dispositiones materiae ad formam_.( ) Aristotle gives as instances
bodily health or beauty.( ) But these _dispositiones materiales ad
formam_ he does not call _habits_, any more than the organic
_dispositiones ad operationem_ just referred to: and for this reason, that
although all these dispositions have a certain degree of stability in the
organism—a stability which they derive, moreover, from the soul which is
the formative principle that secures the continuity and individual
identity of the organism,—yet they are not of themselves, of their own
nature, stable; whereas the acquired dispositions of the spiritual
faculties, intellect and will, rooted as they are in a subject that is
spiritual and substantially immutable, are of their own nature stable and
permanent. Nor are all dispositions of these latter faculties to be deemed
habits, but only those which arise from acts which give them the special
character of stability. Hence mere _opinion_ in the intellectual order, as
distinct from _science_, or a mere _inclination_ resulting from a few
isolated acts, as distinct from a _virtue_ or a _vice_ in the moral order,
are not habits.( ) Habits, therefore, belong properly to the faculties
of a spiritual substance; indirectly, however, they extend their influence
to the lower or organic powers dependent on, and controlled by, the
spiritual faculties.

To the various dispositions and facilities of action acquired by animals
through “training,” “adaptation,” “acclimatization,” etc., we may apply
what has been said in regard to the sense faculties and executive powers
of the human body. Just as we may regard the internal sense faculties
(memory, imagination, sense appetite) in man as in a secondary and
subordinate way subjects of habits, in so far as these faculties act under
the direction and control of human reason and will,( ) so also the
organic dispositions induced in irrational animals by the direction and
guidance of human reason may indeed be regarded as extensions or effects
of the habits that dispose the rational human faculties, but not as
themselves in the strict sense habits.( )

If, then, habits belong properly to intellect and will, and if their
function is to dispose or indispose the human agent for the attainment of
the perfection in which his last end consists, we must naturally look to
_Psychology_ and _Ethics_ for a detailed analysis of them. Here we must be
content with a word on their origin, their effects, and their importance.

Habits are produced by acts. The act modifies the faculty. If, for
instance, nothing remained in our cognitive faculties after each transient
cognitive act had passed, memory would be inexplicable and knowledge
impossible; nor could the repetition of any act ever become easier than
its first performance. This something that remains is a habit, or the
beginning of a habit A habit may be produced by a single act: the mind’s
first intuition of an axiom or principle produces a _habit or habitual
knowledge_ of that principle. But as a rule it requires a repetition of
any act, and that for a long time at comparatively short intervals, to
produce a _habit_ of that act, a stable disposition whereby it can be
readily repeated; and to strengthen and perfect the habit the acts must be
formed with a growing degree of intensity and energy. Progress in virtue
demands sustained and increasingly earnest efforts.

The natural effect of habit is to perfect the faculty,( ) to increase
its energy, to make it more prompt to act, and thus to _facilitate_ the
performance of the act for which the habit disposes it. It also engenders
and develops a natural _need_ or _tendency_ or _desire_ to repeat the act,
and a natural aversion from the acts opposed to the habit. Finally,
according as the habit grows, the performance of the act demands less
effort, calls for less actual attention; thus the habit diminishes the
feeling of effort and tends to bring about a quasi-automatic and
semi-conscious form of activity.

Good habits are those which _perfect_ the nature of the agent, which
advance it towards the realization of its end; bad habits are those which
retard and prevent the realization of this end. Hence the _ethical_
importance, to the human person, of forming, fostering and confirming good
habits, as also of avoiding, resisting and eradicating bad habits, can
scarcely be exaggerated.

The profound and all-pervading influence of habit in the mental and moral
life of man is unfortunately far from being adequately appreciated even by
those responsible for the secular, moral and religious education of the
young. This is perhaps mainly due to the fact that the influence of habit
on the conduct of life, enormous as it is in fact, is so secret, so
largely unconscious, that it easily escapes notice. Careful reflection on
our actions, diligent study of the springs of action in our everyday life,
are needed to reveal this influence. But the more we analyse human conduct
in ourselves and others, the more firmly convinced we become that human
character and conduct are _mainly_ dependent on _the formation of habits_.
Habits are the grand conserving and perfecting—or the terrible undermining
and destroying—force of life. They are the fruit of our past and the seed
of our future. In them the words of Leibniz find their fullest
verification: “the present is laden with the past and pregnant with the
future”. By forming good habits we escape the disheartening difficulties
of perpetual beginnings; and thus the labour we devote to the acquisition
of wisdom and virtue has its first rich recompense in the facility it
gives us to advance on the path of progress.

It has been truly and rightly said that all genuine education consists in
the formation of good habits.

 . POWERS, FACULTIES AND FORCES.—A natural operative power, faculty, or
force (δύναμις, _potentia_, _facultas_, _virtus agendi_) is a quality
which renders the nature of the individual agent apt to elicit certain
actions. By _impotence_ or _incapacity_ (ἀδυναμία, _impotentia_,
_incapacitas_) Aristotle meant not an opposite kind of quality, in
contradistinction to power or faculty, but only a _power of a weaker
order_, differing _in degree_, not _in kind_, from the real power which
renders an agent proximately capable of acting; such weaker capacities,
for instance, as the infant’s power to walk, or the defective eyesight of
the aged.

It is to the individual subsisting person or thing that all the actions
proceeding from the latter are ascribed: _actiones sunt suppositorum_: the
“_suppositum_” or person is the _principium_ QUOD _agit_. And it acts in
accordance with its nature; this latter is the _principium_ QUO _agens
agit_: the nature is the substance or essence as a principle of the
actions whereby the individual tends to realize its end. But is a created,
finite nature the _immediate_ or _proximate_ principle of its activities,
so that it is operative _per se_? Or is it only their _remote principle_,
eliciting them not by itself but _only_ by means of _powers_, _faculties_,
_forces_, which are themselves accidental perfections of the substance and
_really distinct_ from it, qualities intermediate between the latter and
its actions, being the _proximate_ principles of the latter?

No doubt when any individual nature is acted upon by other agencies, when
it undergoes real change under the influence of its environment, its
_passive potentiality_ is being so far forth actualized. Moreover when the
nature itself acts _immanently_, the term of such action remaining within
the agent itself to actualize or perfect it, some _passive potentiality_
of the agent is being actualized. In these cases the nature before being
thus actualized was really capable of such actualization. This _passive
potentiality_, however, is itself nothing actual, it implies no actual
perfection in the nature. But we must distinguish carefully from this
_passive or receptive potentiality_ of a nature its _active or operative
powers_—_potentiae operativae_. These may be themselves _actual
perfections_ in the nature, _accidental_ perfections actually in the
nature, and perhaps really distinct from it.

That they are indeed _actual_ perfections of the nature is fairly obvious:
it is an actual perfection of a nature to be _proximately_ and
_immediately_, and without any further complement or addition to its
reality, _capable of acting_; and this is true whether the action in
question be immanent or transitive: if it be immanent, the perfection
resulting from the action, the term of the latter, will be a perfection of
the agent itself, and in this case the agent by virtue of its operative
power will have had _the capacity of perfecting itself_; while if the
action be transitive the agent will have had, in virtue of its operative
power, _the capacity of producing perfections in other things_. In either
case such capacity is undoubtedly an actual perfection of the agent that
possesses it. Hence the truth of the scholastic formula: _Omne agens agit
in quantum est in_ ACTU, _patiatur vero inquantum est in_ POTENTIA.

Furthermore, all such operative powers are _really distinct from the
actions_ which immediately proceed from them: this, too, is obvious, for
while the operative power is a stable, abiding characteristic of the
agent, the actions elicited by means of it are transient.

But what is the nature of this operative power in relation to the nature
itself of the agent? It is an actual perfection of this nature. It is,
moreover, unlike acquired habits, native to this nature, born with it so
to speak, naturally inseparable from it. Further still, operative powers
would seem to be all _properties_ ( ) of their respective natures:
inasmuch as it is only in virtue of the operative power that the nature
can act, and there can be no nature without connatural operations whereby
it tends to realize the full and _final_ perfection of its being, the
perfection which is the very _raison d’être_ of its presence in the actual
order of things. The question therefore narrows itself down to this: Are
operative powers, which perfect the nature of which they are properties,
really distinct from this nature, or are they only virtually distinct
aspects under which we view the nature itself? For example, when we speak
of intellect and will as being faculties of the human soul, do we merely
mean that intellect is the soul itself regarded as capable of reasoning,
and will the soul itself regarded as capable of willing? Or do we mean
that the soul is not _by itself_ and _in virtue of its own essence_
capable of reasoning and willing; that it can reason and will only through
the instrumentality of two realities of the accidental order, really
distinct from, though at the same time _necessarily_ rooted in and
springing from, the substance of the soul itself: realities which we call
_powers_ or _faculties_? Or again, when we speak of a man or an animal as
having various _sense faculties_—internal and external, cognitive,
appetitive, executive—do we merely mean that the living, sentient organism
is itself directly capable of eliciting acts of various kinds: of
imagining, desiring, seeing, hearing, etc.? Or do we mean that the
organism can elicit these various acts only by means of several accidental
realities, really distinct from, and inhering in, itself?

If such operative powers or faculties are naturally inseparable from the
substance in which they inhere, if they are so necessarily consequent on
the nature of the latter that it cannot exist without them, are they
anything more than virtually distinct aspects of the substance itself? On
this question, as we have already seen ( ), scholastics are not agreed.
St. Thomas, and Thomists generally, maintain that intellect and will are
really distinct from the substance of the soul, and likewise that the
sense faculties are really distinct from the substance of the animated
organism in which they inhere.( ) In this view the distinction is not
merely a virtual distinction between different aspects of the soul (or the
organism) itself, grounded in the variety and complexity of the acts which
emanate from the latter: the faculties are real entities of the accidental
order, mediating between the substance and its actions, and involving in
the concrete being a plurality which, however, is not incompatible with
the real unity of the latter ( ).

The following are some of the arguments urged in proof of a real
distinction:—

(_a_) Existence and action are two really distinct actualities; therefore
the potentialities which they actualize must be really distinct: for such
is the transcendental relation between the potential and the actual that
any potential subject and the corresponding perfection which actualizes it
must belong to the same _genus supremum_: the one cannot be a substance
and the other an accident.( ) Now existence is the actuality of
_essence_ and action is the actuality of _operative power_ or _faculty_.
But action is certainly an accident; therefore the operative power which
it actualizes must also be an accident, and must therefore be really
distinct from the substance of which it is a power, and of which existence
is the actuality. This line of argument applies with equal force to all
created natures.( )

In the Infinite Being alone are operation and substance identical. No
creature is operative in virtue of its substance. The actions of a
creature cannot be actualizations _of its substance_: _existence_ is the
actualization of its substance; therefore its actions must be
actualizations of potentialities which are _accidents_ distinct from its
substance; in other words, of operative powers which belong indeed
necessarily to its substance but are really distinct from the latter.

This argument rests on very ultimate metaphysical conceptions. But not all
scholastics will admit the assumptions it involves. How, for instance,
does it appear that the created or finite substance as such cannot be
_immediately_ operative? Even were it immediately operative its actions
would still be accidents, and the distinction between Creator and creature
would stand untouched. The operative power must be an accident because the
action which actualizes it, the “_actus secundus_,” is an accident. But
the _consequentia_ has not been proved, and it is not self-evident. On the
theory of the real distinction, is not the operative power itself an
_actual perfection_ of the substance, and therefore in some sort an
actualization of the latter? And yet they are not in the same ultimate
category, _in eodem genere supremo_. The nature which is the potential
subject, perfected by the operative power, is a substance, while the
operative power which perfects the substance by actualizing this
potentiality is an accident. Of course there is not exactly the same
correlation between substance and operative power as between the latter
and action. But anyhow the action is in some true sense an actualization
of the substance, at least through the medium of the power, unless we are
prepared to break up the concrete unity of the agent by referring the
action solely to the power of the agent, and isolating the substance of
the latter as a sort of immutable core which merely “exists”: a mode of
conceiving the matter, which looks very like the mistake of reifying
abstract concepts. And if the action is in any true sense an actualization
of the substance, we have, after all, a _potentia_ and _actus_ which are
not in the same ultimate category.


    These considerations carry us, of course, right into what is
    perhaps the most fundamental of all metaphysical problems: that of
    the mode in which finite reality is actual. In its concrete
    actuality every finite real being is essentially subject to
    change: its actuality is not _tota simul_: at every instant it not
    only _is_ but is _becoming_: it is a mixture of potentiality and
    actuality: it is ever really changing, and yet the “it” which
    changes can in some real degree and for some real space of time
    persist or endure identical with itself as a “subsisting thing” or
    “person”. How, then, are we to conceive aright the mode of its
    actuality? Take the concrete existing being at any instant of its
    actuality: suppose that it is not merely undergoing change through
    the influence of other beings in its environment, or through its
    own immanent action, but that it is itself “acting,” whether
    immanently or transitively. If we consider that at this instant
    its _existence_ is “really distinct” from its _action_ we cannot
    mean by this that there is in it an unchanging substantial core,
    which is actually merely “existing,” and a vesture of active and
    passive accidental principles, which is just now actual (though
    always in a state of flux or change) by “acting” or “being acted
    on”.( ) Such a conception would conflict with the truth that the
    existing substance is ever being really and actually, though
    accidentally, determined, changed, modified, improved or
    disimproved, in its total concrete existing reality. Even when
    these changes are not so profound as to destroy its substantial
    identity and thus terminate its actuality as an individual being,
    even when, in other words, they are not substantial, they are none
    the less real and really affect the substance. Since they are real
    they necessarily involve the recognition of really distinct
    principles in the concrete being and preclude the view that the
    distinctions which we recognize in the ever-changing modes of its
    actuality, as revealed to us in time and space, are all _merely_
    conceptual or logical distinctions projected by the mind into what
    would therefore be in fact a simple and immutable reality. The
    denial of any real distinction between successive actual states,
    or between co-existing principles of those states, in any finite
    being, would lead logically to the Eleatic doctrine, _i.e._ to
    denial of the reality of change. On the other hand, while
    recognizing that change is a reality and not a subjective mental
    illusion, and that real change can be grounded only in a plurality
    of really distinct principles in the finite individual being, we
    must at the same time hold that this plurality of really distinct
    principles in the individual does not destroy a real unity,
    stability, and self-identical continuity of the individual being
    in the mode of its actuality throughout time. Not, of course, that
    this stability or sameness of the individual throughout time is
    complete and adequate to the exclusion of all real change, but it
    is certainly a _real_ continuity of one and the same individual
    being: to deny this would be to remove all permanence from reality
    and to reduce all real being to flux or change, _i.e._ to the
    πάντα ρέι of the Ionian philosopher, Heraclitus.

    We cannot get a true conception of any finite reality by
    considering it merely from the _static_ point of view, which is
    the natural standpoint of abstract thought; we must view it also
    from the _dynamic-kinetic_ standpoint, _i.e._ not merely as an
    essence or principle of existence, but as a power or principle of
    action, and of consequent change, evolution, or decay. And the
    philosophy which is the latest fashion among contemporary systems,
    that of the brilliant French thinker and writer, Bergson, has at
    all events the merit of emphasizing this important truth, that if
    our philosophical analysis of experience is to be fruitful we must
    try to grasp reality not merely as it presents itself to abstract
    thought at any section drawn by the latter through the incessant
    process of its _fieri_ or continuous actualization in time, but
    also to grasp and analyse as far as possible the _fieri_ or
    process itself, and bring to light whatever we find that this
    process implies.

    These considerations may help the student to estimate for himself
    the value and the limitations of the argument which has suggested
    them.


(_b_) A thing cannot be really identical with a variety of things that are
really distinct from one another; but the faculties of the soul are really
distinct from one another; therefore they must be really distinct from the
substance of the soul. The minor premiss is supported by these
considerations: The vegetative and sentient operations of the human
individual are operations of the living _organism_, while the higher
operations of rational thought and volition are operations of the _soul
alone_, the spiritual or immaterial principle in the individual. But the
immaterial principle cannot be really and adequately identical with the
animated organism. Therefore the _powers_ or _immediate principles_ of
these two classes of functions, belonging as they do to two really (though
not adequately) distinct substantial principles, cannot be really
identical with one of them, _viz._ with the soul itself, the spiritual
principle. Again: The exercise of certain functions by the human
individual is subordinate to, and dependent on the previous exercise of
other functions. For example, actual volition is necessarily dependent and
consequent on actual thought: we cannot will or desire any good without
first knowing it as a good. But the immediate principle of any function or
activity cannot be dependent on or subordinate to itself. Therefore the
immediate principles of such controlling and controlled
activities—intellect and will, for example—must be really distinct
faculties.( )

(_c_) Suppose the substance or nature of an agent—the human individual,
for instance—were really identical with all its powers or faculties, that
these were merely the nature itself viewed under different aspects, so
that there would be in reality only one operative power in the individual,
then there would be no reason why the individual could not or should not
at any instant elicit one single action or operation which would be
simultaneously an act of thinking, willing, seeing, hearing, etc., _i.e._
which would have at once in itself the modalities of all human activities.
But universal experience testifies, on the contrary, that the operations
of the individual are each of some particular mode only, that he cannot
elicit every mode of human activity simultaneously, that he never elicits
one single act having a variety of modes. But why could he not, if his
substance or nature itself were the one and only _proximate principle_ of
all his modes of activity? Because the conditions for the _full and
adequate_ exercise of this one single or proximate principle (at once
substance and power) are never realized! But it is arbitrary to assume the
existence of a power which could never pass fully into the act connatural
to it. And moreover, even if these conditions are partially realized we
should see as a consequence of this some human activity which would
manifest _in some degree at least_ all the modalities of the various human
actions of which we have experience. But we have no experience of a single
human activity manifesting _in any degree_ the modalities of the numerous
and really distinct human activities which experience reveals to us. Hence
the variety of these really distinct modes of activity can be explained
only by the fact that the human individual elicits them through proximate
operative principles or powers which are really distinct from one another
and from the nature itself of the individual.( )


    The problem of analysing and classifying the forces, faculties, or
    powers of the subsisting things and persons in the universe of our
    experience, belongs partly to Cosmology and partly to Psychology.
    In the latter it becomes mainly a problem of classifying our
    mental acts, functions, or processes—our states of consciousness.
    Apart from the question whether or not our mental faculties are
    really distinct from one another and from the human nature or
    substance itself of the individual, the problem of their proper
    classification is important from the point of view of _method_ and
    of _accurate psychological analysis_. We have seen already ( )
    that the greatest scholastic philosophers are not unanimous in
    declaring the distinction to be real. But it is at least a virtual
    distinction; and even as such it gives rise to the problem of
    classification. It will be sufficient here to indicate the general
    principle on which the classification proceeds: Wherever the
    _acts_ are _adequately distinct_ they proceed from distinct
    powers; and the acts are adequately distinct when they have
    adequately distinct _formal objects_.( ) _Potentiae
    specificantur per actus et objecta._ The operation or act is the
    correlative of the power or faculty; and the _formal object_ or
    _term_ of the operation is the _final cause_ of the latter, the
    end for which it is elicited. On this basis Aristotle and the
    scholastics distinguish two mental faculties of the higher or
    spiritual order, intellect and will; and in the lower or sense
    order of mental life they distinguish one appetitive faculty,
    sense appetite, and several cognitive sense faculties. These
    latter comprise the internal sense faculties, _viz._ the _sensus
    communis_ or unifying and associating sense, the imagination,
    sense memory, and instinct; and the external sense faculties
    comprise sight, sound, taste, smell and touch.


 . SOME CHARACTERISTICS OF QUALITIES.—(_a_) _Qualities __ have
contraries_. Health and illness, virtue and vice, science and error, etc.,
are opposed as contraries. This, however, is not a _property_ of
qualities; it is not verified in powers, or in forms and figures; and it
is verified in accidents which are not qualities, _e.g._ in _actio_ and
_passio_.

(_b_) _Quality is the basis or _“fundamentum”_ of all relations of
similarity and dissimilarity._ This attribute seems to be in the strict
sense a _property_ of all qualities. Substances are _similar_ in so far as
they have the same kind of qualities, _dissimilar_ in so far as they have
different kinds. _Similarity_ of substances is the main index to _identity
of nature or kind_; but it must not be confounded with the latter. The
latter cannot always be inferred even from a high degree of similarity:
some specifically distinct classes of things are very similar to one
another. Nor, on the other hand, is full and complete similarity a
necessary consequence of identity of nature: individuals of the same
species are often very dissimilar, very unlike one another.

(_c_) _Qualities admit of varying degrees of intensity._ They can increase
or diminish in the same substance, while numerically (and specifically)
distinct substances can have the same kind of quality in different
degrees. This is manifest in regard to “habits,” “passions” and “sensible
qualities”. On the other hand, it is clearly not true of “form” or
“figure”. Different individuals can have the same kind of “natural power”
in different degrees. One man may be naturally of keener intellect and
stronger will than another: the _weak_ power was what Aristotle called
ἀδυναμία (_impotentia_). But whether the natural powers of the same
individual can _themselves_ increase or decrease in strength or
intensity—and not merely the _habits_ that affect these powers—is not so
clear. Operative powers are certainly perfected (or injured) by the
acquisition of good (or bad) habits. In the view of those who deny a real
distinction between natural operative power or faculty and substance, it
is, of course, the substance itself that is so perfected (or injured).

This attribute, therefore, is _not_ found in _all_ qualities; but it is
found in qualities _alone_, and not in any other category or mode of
being.

How are we to conceive this variation in intensity, this growth or
diminution of any quality, in a substance in which such change takes
places? On this point philosophers are not agreed. By “degree of
intensity”—“_intensio vel remissio __ qualitatis_”—we understand the
degree (or change of degree) in which the same numerical quality affects
_the same part_ or _the same power_ of its subject, thus rendering this
part or power formally more or less “qualified” in some particular way.
This is clearly something quite different from the _extension_ of the same
quality to different parts (or its withdrawal from different parts) of the
same extended subject. In a corporeal, extended substance, there can
accordingly be question of both kinds of change, _intensive_ and
_extensive_; while in a simple, spiritual substance there can obviously be
question only of _intensive_ change of qualities. And the fact of
intensive change of qualities is an undeniable fact of experience. In what
manner does it take place? Some authors conceive it as an addition or
subtraction of _grades_ or _degrees_ of the same quality. Others,
conceiving qualities as simple, indivisible entities or “forms,” and
thence denying the possibility of distinct grades of any quality, conceive
such change to take place by this simple entity affecting its subject
_more or less intimately_, becoming _more or less firmly rooted_, as it
were, in its subject.( ) And they explain this more or less perfect mode
of inherence in a variety of ways, all of which are grounded on certain
texts of St. Thomas:( ) the quality receives a new accidental mode
whereby it “communicates itself to” the subject, and “informs” the latter,
more or less perfectly; or, it is educed more or less fully from the
potentiality of its subject, thus qualifying the latter in the degree in
which it is educed from, and rooted in, the latter.


    These explanations are instructive, as illustrating the view that
    the actual reality of the accidental mode of being consists in its
    affecting, determining, the subject in which it inheres. St.
    Thomas, professing that he can attach no intelligible meaning to
    addition or substraction of grades,( ) teaches that the habit of
    charity, for example, can be increased “secundum essentiam” by
    “inhering more perfectly,” “being more firmly rooted” in its
    subject; for, he says, since it is an accident, “ejus esse est
    inesse. Unde nihil est aliud ipsam secundum essentiam augeri, quam
    eam magis inesse subjecto, quod est magis eam radicari in
    subjecto. Augetur ergo essentialiter... ita quod magis ac magis in
    subjecto esse incipiat.”( ) And elsewhere he concludes with the
    words: “Ponere igitur quod aliqua qualitas non augeatur secundum
    essentiam, sed augeatur secundum radicationem in subjecto vel
    secundum intensionem actus, est ponere contradictoria esse
    simul”.( )





CHAPTER XI. QUANTITY, SPACE AND TIME.


 . ANALYSIS OF THE CONCEPT OF QUANTITY.—A detailed study of Quantity,
including Space and Time, and the Aristotelian categories _Ubi_, _Quando_
and _Situs_, belongs to Cosmology. Here we shall confine ourselves mainly
to the exposition of certain elementary notions preparatory to such
detailed study; and we shall assume the validity of the Scholastic Theory
of Knowledge: that a real, material world exists independently of our
minds; that it consists of material substances or bodies, animate and
inanimate, endowed with the fundamental accident of quantity or extension;
that these bodies possess, moreover, many other real accidents such as
qualities and energies, chemical, physical and mechanical; that they are
subject to real change, local, quantitative, qualitative and substantial;
that our concepts of space and time, derived from those of extension and
change, are not purely subjective or mental forms of cognition, but are
objectively valid notions grounded in the reality of the corporeal
universe and giving us a genuine, if inadequate, insight into the nature
of this reality.

Among the characteristics recognized by physicists in all perceptible
matter—divisibility, commensurability, impenetrability, passivity or
inertia, subjection to external forces or energies, external extension or
volume, internal quantity or mass—there are none more fundamental than
those of volume and mass, or extension and quantity.( ) Nowhere,
however, do we find a better illustration of the fact that it is
impossible to give a definition proper of any supreme category, or even a
description of it by the aid of any more elementary notions, than in the
attempts of philosophers to describe _Quantity_. When, for instance, we
describe _external_, _actual_, _local_, or _spatial extension_ as _that
accident of a corporeal substance or body in virtue of which the latter so
exists that it has parts outside parts in space_, we have to admit at once
that the notions expressed by the terms “parts,” “outside” and “space” are
no simpler than the notion of extension itself: in fact our notions of
“place” (_locus_) and “space” (_spatium_) are derived from, and
presuppose, that of extension. This, however, is no serious disadvantage;
for the description, such as it is, indicates what we mean by the terms
“local, spatial, external, actual extension,” and declares this latter to
be an accident of corporeal substances.

Extension, as it is actually in the concrete body, affected by a variety
of sensible qualities, is called _physical_ extension; regarded in the
abstract, apart from these qualities, it is called _geometrical_ or
_mathematical_ extension: _trina dimensio_, or extension in three
dimensions, length, breadth and depth. If we abstract from one of these we
have extension in _two_ dimensions, _superficial_ extension; if we
abstract from _two_, we have extension in _one_ dimension, _linear_
extension; and if we abstract from all three we have the extreme _limiting
concept_ of the _mathematical point_. Of these four abstract mathematical
concepts, “point,” “line,” “surface,” and “volume,” each expresses the
_mathematical limitation_ of the succeeding one.

We cannot conceive a body existing by having parts outside parts in space,
each part occupying exclusively a place appropriated to itself, unless we
conceive the body, the corporeal _substance_, as having already a
plurality of _really distinct_ or _distinguishable_ parts _in itself_, and
abstracting from all relation to space. The _substance_ must be conceived
as having a plurality of really distinct or distinguishable _integral_
parts of itself, before these parts can be conceived as existing _outside_
one another, each in its own place. And the property in virtue of which
the corporeal substance has in itself this plurality of distinct integral
parts, whereby it is _capable_ of occupying space, and of being
impenetrable, divisible, measurable, etc., is called _internal_,
_radical_, _potential quantity_ or _extension_.( )

The corporeal substance itself is, of course, _essentially_ composite,
essentially divisible into two _essential_ constitutive principles, the
passive, determinable, or material principle (_materia prima_), and the
specifying, determining, formative principle (_forma substantialis_). Then
we conceive this essentially composite substance as necessarily endowed
with the _property_ of _internal quantity_ whereby it is composite in
another order: composed of, and divisible into, really distinct _integral_
parts, each of which is, of course, essentially composite like the whole
itself.( ) Finally we conceive that the corporeal substance, endowed
with this property, has also, as a connatural but really distinct and
absolutely separable effect of the latter, the accidental mode of being,
called external or local extension, in virtue of which it actually
occupies space, and thus becomes the subject of all those qualities
whereby it is perceptible to our senses.

We have next to inquire into the relations between these three distinct
objective concepts, corporeal substance, internal quantity, and local or
external extension.

 . CORPOREAL SUBSTANCE, QUANTITY AND EXTENSION.—The corporeal substance
is an essentially composite substance, resulting from the union of two
distinct essential constitutive principles. It exists in itself and is the
ultimate subject of all the determinations whereby it reveals itself to
our senses. Its actual extension in space is a fundamental mode or
determination of its reality, but it is a mode which is distinct from the
reality itself of the corporeal substance. Aristotle regarded the
distinction as real. In his _Metaphysics_ he declares that the three
dimensions of bodies are quantities, not substances, that quantity is not
a substance, whereas that in which it ultimately inheres is a
substance;( ) in his _Physics_ he says that substance is of itself
indivisible and is made divisible by its quantity or extension;( ) in
his _De Anima_( ) he observes that [external] quantity is directly
perceptible by the senses (_sensibile_ per se) while substance is only
indirectly perceptible (_sensibile_ per accidens):( ) from which it is
inferred that substance and extension cannot be really identical. Again,
St. Thomas argues that a corporeal substance as such, and so far as its
essence is concerned, is indifferent to greater or less extension in
space, that the whole nature or substance of a man, for instance, is
indifferent to, and independent of, his particular size at any point of
time, that while he grows from childhood to manhood it is his external
quantity that changes, but not his humanity, his human essence, nature, or
substance.( )

Considerations such as these, though they do not indeed amount to cogent
proofs of a real distinction between spatial extension and corporeal
substance, should make any serious philosopher hesitate to identify these
absolutely, as Descartes and his followers did when they declared the
essence of corporeal substance to consist in three dimensions of spatial
extension. Even looking at the matter from the point of view of natural
reason alone, and apart altogether from any light that may be thrown upon
it for the Christian philosopher by Divine Revelation, it is only the
superficial thinker who will conclude that because extension—which reveals
to his intellect through the medium of external sense perception the
presence of a corporeal substance—is naturally inseparable from the
latter, therefore it is really and absolutely identical with this latter.
The philosopher who remembers how little is known for certain about the
ultimate, essential constitution of bodies or corporeal substances, will
be slow to conclude that the spatially extended mode of their being enters
into the constitution of their essence, and is not rather an accidental
determination whereby these substances have their integral parts dispersed
or extended in space and thus revealed to the human intellect through
sense perception.


    And if he be a Christian philosopher he will naturally inquire
    whether any truth of the Christian Revelation will help indirectly
    to determine the question. Descartes and his followers were
    Christian philosophers; and hence it was all the more rash and
    imprudent of them, in spite of what they knew concerning the
    Blessed Eucharist, to identify the corporeal substance with its
    spatial extension. They knew that by transubstantiation the bread
    and wine are changed _substantially_ into the Body and Blood of
    Christ. But all the _appearances_ or _phenomena_ of bread and wine
    remain after transubstantiation, the Eucharistic _species_ as they
    are called, the taste, colour, form, etc., in a word, all the
    sensible qualities of these substances, including the _extension_
    in which they immediately inhere. From the revealed truth that the
    _substances_ disappear, and from the manifest fact that all their
    _accidents_ remain, Christian philosophers and theologians have
    rightly drawn the sufficiently obvious inference that the
    spatially extended quantity, which immediately supports all the
    other sensible qualities, must be itself an _absolute_ accident
    not only _really distinct_, but by the absolute power of God
    _really separable_, from its _connatural substance_, the bread and
    the wine respectively; and that this extended quantity remains in
    this state of actual separation miraculously supported by the
    direct influence of the Divine Omnipotence. And while Christian
    philosophers who hold this view can defend it from all charges of
    inconsistency, unreasonableness and impossibility, Descartes and
    his followers can defend their particular view only by the
    admission that in the case of the consecrated Eucharist our senses
    are deceived. In this view, while no accidents of the bread and
    wine remain objectively, God Himself produces directly in our
    minds the subjective, mental states which the bread and wine
    produced before consecration.( ) This gratuitous aspersion is
    cast on the trustworthiness of sense perception, simply on account
    of the preconceived theory identifying the corporeal substance
    with its extension. According to the common view, on the other
    hand, the senses are not really deceived. That to which they
    testify is really there, _viz._ the whole collection of natural
    accidents of bread and wine. It is not the function of the senses,
    but of the intellect, to testify to the presence of the substance.
    Of course the unbeliever looking at the consecrated species, or
    the believer who looks at them not knowing that they have been
    consecrated, thinks that the substance of bread and the substance
    of wine are there. Each is deceived intellectually, the one by his
    unbelief of a truth, the other by his ignorance of a fact. If both
    knew of the fact of consecration, and if the former believed in
    the effect of it, neither would be deceived.( )

    While the Cartesian view is thus open to such serious objections,
    the only plausible difficulty against the traditional view is that
    of conceiving how the reality of a merely accidental mode of
    being, such as extension, can be sustained in the actual order of
    things apart from its connatural substance, and yet not become
    itself _eo ipso_ a substance. Needless to say we have no
    _positive_ conception of the manner in which the Divine
    Omnipotence thus sustains extension; but since this latter, being
    an absolute accident, and not a mere modal determination of the
    substance, has a reality of its own, the miraculous persistence of
    this reality cannot be shown to be impossible. Nor is it, in this
    separated condition, itself a substance, for it still retains its
    natural aptitude for inherence in its connatural substance; and
    this _aptitude_ alone, not _actual_ inherence, is of its essence
    as an accident ( ): retaining this natural aptitude it cannot
    possibly become a substance, it cannot be identified with the
    _substantial_ mode of being which has essentially the very
    opposite aptitude, that of _existing in itself_.


External extension, then, is an absolute accident, really distinct from
the corporeal substance, and naturally though not absolutely inseparable
from the latter. It is the natural concomitant or consequence of the
_internal quantity_ whereby the corporeal substance has in itself a
plurality of distinct integral parts. This _internal quantity_ itself is
either an aspect of the corporeal substance itself, only virtually
distinct from the latter, or else in the strict sense a _property_,
absolutely inseparable, if really distinct, from the substance. Natural
experience furnishes no example of a corporeal substance actually existing
devoid of internal quantity or internal distinction of integral
parts.( ) But scholastic philosophers are not agreed as to whether the
corporeal substance is itself and by its own essence a manifold of really
distinct integral parts (in which case internal quantity would be merely
the aspect under which the essence is thus regarded as an integral whole
constituted by a plurality of distinct integral parts; while, looked at as
an essence, it would be an essential whole constituted by the union of two
essential parts or principles)—or whether it is formally constituted an
integral whole, not by its essence (which makes it only an essential
whole, an essentially composite substance), but by a property really
distinct, though necessarily flowing, from this essence, _viz._ internal
quantity. According to the former view the material principle (_materia
prima_) of the composite corporeal substance is such that the essence
resulting from its union with the formative principle (_forma
substantialis_) is necessarily an integral whole with distinguishable
integral parts, each of which naturally demands the spatially extended
mode of being which external extension _de facto_ confers upon it.
According to the latter view, which is that of St. Thomas and his
followers generally, the corporeal substance as such has no mode of
composition other than _essential_ composition: it is not of itself an
_integral_ whole, compounded of distinct or distinguishable integral parts
(each of which would be, like the whole, essentially composite): of itself
it is _indivisible_ into integral parts: it is, therefore, in this order
of being, simple and not composite. It has, no doubt, by reason of its
material principle, an absolutely necessary exigence for divisibility into
distinct integral parts, for integral composition in other words. But this
actual integral composition, this actual divisibility, is the formal
effect of a property really distinct from the substantial essence itself;
and this property is internal quantity: the connatural, but absolutely
separable, complement of this internal quantity being, as in the other
view, local or spatial extension.

In both views external extension is an absolute accident of the corporeal
substance; and in the Thomist view internal quantity would also appear to
be an absolute accident, and not a mere mode.


    It is instructive to reflect how far this scholastic doctrine
    removes us from the Cartesian view which sets up an absolute
    antithesis between mind or spirit, and matter or body, placing the
    essence of the former in _thought_ and that of the latter in
    _extension_. According to the scholastic view the spiritual
    substance is an immaterial “actuality” or “form”; it is
    _essentially simple_, and not like a corporeal substance an
    _essentially composite_ substance resulting from the union of a
    formative principle or “form” with a passive, determinable,
    material principle. And since it is the material principle that
    demands the property of internal quantity and the accident of
    external extension, whereby the corporeal substance becomes an
    integral whole with its parts extended in space, it follows that
    the spiritual substance, having no material principle in its
    constitution, is not only _essentially_ simple—to the exclusion of
    distinct principles of its essence,—but is also and as a
    consequence _integrally_ simple, to the exclusion of distinct
    integral parts, and of the extended or characteristically
    corporeal mode of occupying space. So far there is contrast
    between the two great substantial modes of finite being, matter
    and spirit; but the contrast is by no means an absolute
    antithesis. For if we look at the essence alone of the corporeal
    substance it is not _of itself_ actually extended in space: in the
    Thomist view it is not even of itself divisible into distinct
    integral parts. It differs from spirit in this that while the
    latter is essentially simple the former is essentially composite
    and has by reason of this compositeness a natural aptitude for
    divisibility into parts and for the extension of these parts in
    space, an aptitude which spirit does not possess. But the
    corporeal substance _may_ exist without actual extension, and
    consequently without any of those other attributes such as
    impenetrability, solidity, colour, etc., through which it is
    perceptible to our senses. In this condition, how does it differ
    from spirit? In being essentially composite, and in being perhaps
    endowed with distinguishable integral parts.( ) But in this
    condition the essential mode of its being has a relation to space
    which closely resembles the mode in which spirit exists in space:
    it is related to space somewhat in the manner in which the soul is
    in the space occupied by the body—whole in the whole of this space
    and whole in every assignable portion of this space. So that after
    all, different as matter and spirit undoubtedly are, the
    difference between them is by no means that sort of Cartesian
    chasm which human thought must for ever fail to bridge.


By virtue of its external extension the corporeal substance exists by
having distinguishable parts outside parts in space. We can conceive any
perceptible volume of matter as being _perfectly continuous_, if it has no
_actual_ limits or _actual_ distinction of parts within itself, but is
_one_ individual being _completely filling_ the whole space within its
outer surface; or _imperfectly continuous_, if while being one and
undivided it has within its volume pores or interstices, whether these be
empty or filled with some other sort of matter; or as made up of
_contiguous_ integral parts if each or these is really distinct and
actually divided from every other, while each actually touches with its
outer limits the adjacent limits of the parts lying next to it, so that
all the internal parts or limits are co-terminous; or as made up of
separate, _discrete_ or distant parts no one of which actually touches any
other.

It is clear that there must be, in any actually extended volume of matter,
_ultimate_ parts which are really _continuous_—unless we are to hold, with
dynamists, that our perception of extension is produced in our minds by
the action of extramental points or centres of force which are themselves
_simple_ or _unextended_. But the physical phenomena of contraction,
expansion, absorption, undulatory and vibratory motions accompanying our
sensations of light, heat and sound, as well as many other physical
phenomena, all point to the fact that volumes of matter which are
_apparently_ continuous are really porous: the molecular structure of
perceptible matter is an accepted physical theory; and scientists also
universally accept as a working hypothesis the existence of an
imperceptible material medium pervading and filling all real space, though
there is no agreement as to the properties with which they suppose this
hypothetical medium, the “ether,” to be endowed.

Again, as regards the _divisibility_ of extended matter, it is obvious
that if we conceive extension in three dimensions _geometrically_,
_mathematically_ or _in the abstract_, any such volume or extension is
_indefinitely divisible_ in thought. But if we inquire how far any
concrete, actually existing volume of matter is divisible, we know in the
first place that we cannot divide the body of any actual organic living
thing indefinitely without destroying its life, and so its specific
character. Nor can we carry on the division of inorganic matter
indefinitely for want of sufficiently delicate dividing instruments. But
apart from this the science of chemistry points to the fact that every
inorganic chemical compound has an ultimate individual unit, the chemical
molecule, which we cannot sub-divide without destroying the specific
nature of the compound by resolving it into its elements or into less
complex compounds. Furthermore, each “elementary” or “chemically simple”
body—such as gold, oxygen, carbon, etc.—seems resolvable into units called
“atoms,” which appear to be ultimate _individual_ units in the sense that
if their mass _can_ be subdivided (as appears possible from researches
that have originated in the discovery of radium) the subdivisions are
specifically different kinds of matter from that of the atom so divided.

In the inorganic world the perceptible mass of matter is certainly not an
_individual_ being, a _unum per se_, but only a collection of individual
atoms or molecules, a _unum per accidens_. Whether the molecule or the
atom of the chemically elementary body is the “individual,” cannot be
determined with any degree of certitude. It would appear, however, that
every specifically distinct type of inorganic matter, whether compound or
elementary, requires for its existence a certain minimal volume, by the
sub-division of which the type is substantially changed; and this is
manifestly true of organic or living matter: so that matter _as it
naturally exists_ would appear not to be indefinitely divisible.


    If in a chemically homogeneous mass of _inorganic_ matter (such as
    carbon or water) the chemical molecule be regarded as the
    “individual,” this cannot be the case in any _organic_, _living
    thing_, for whatever matter is assimilated into the living
    substance of such a being _eo ipso_ undergoes substantial change
    whereby it loses the nature it had and becomes a constituent of
    the living individual. The _substantial_, “_individual_” unity of
    the organic living being seems to be compatible not merely with
    qualitative (structural and functional) heterogeneity of parts,
    but also with (perhaps even _complete_) spatial separateness of
    these parts. If the structure of the living body is really
    “molecular,” _i.e._ if it has _distances_ between its ultimate
    integral units, so that these are not in spatial contact, then the
    fact that the formative, vital principle (_forma substantialis_,
    _anima_) unifies this material manifold, and constitutes it an
    “individual” by actualizing and vitalizing each and all of the
    material units, spatially separate as they are,—this fact will
    help us to realize that the _formative principle_ of the composite
    corporeal substance has not _of itself_ the _spatial_, _extended_
    mode of being, but that the substance derives the latter from its
    material principle (_materia prima_).


 . PLACE AND SPACE.—From the concept of the volume or actual extension of
a body we pass immediately to that of the “place” (_locus_) which it
occupies. We may distinguish between the _internal_ and the _external_
place of a body. By the former we understand _the outer (convex) surface
of the body itself, regarded as a receptacle containing the volume of the
body_. If, therefore, there were only one body in existence it would have
its own internal place: this is independent of other bodies. Not so,
however, the external place; for by the external place of a body we mean
_the immediately surrounding (concave) surface_, formed by the bodies
which circumscribe the body in question, and _considered formally as an
immovable container of this body_. This is a free rendering of Aristotle’s
definition: _Place is the first (or immediate) immovable surface (or
limit) of that which contains a body_: _prima immobilis superficies ejus
quod continet_.( ) If a hollow sphere were filled with water, the inner
or concave surface of the sphere would be the “external place” of the
water. Not, however, this surface considered materially, but _formally as
a surface_, so that if the sphere could be removed, and another
instantaneously substituted for it, the water would still be contained
within the same _formal_ surface; its _locus externus_ would remain the
same. And, again, it is the containing surface considered as _immovable_
or as circumscribing that definite portion of space, that constitutes the
_locus externus_ or “external place” of the located body: so that if the
sphere with the water were moved the latter would thereby obtain a new
external location, for though the containing surface be still materially
and formally the same, it is no longer the same _as a locating_ surface,
seeing that it now marks off a portion of space different from that marked
off by it before it was moved.

Aristotle’s definition defines what is known as the _proper_ external
place of a body. From this we distinguish the _common_ external place or
location of a body: understanding by the latter, or “locus _communis_,”
the whole collection of spatial relations of the body in question to all
the bodies in its immediate neighbourhood. It is by indicating these
relations, or some of them, that we assign the Aristotelian category, or
extrinsic denomination, _Ubi_.( )

Regarded ontologically, the internal place of a body is an absolute
accident: it is the accident which gives the latter concrete volume or
external extension, and it is not really distinct from the latter. The
external place of a body includes in addition the spatial relations of the
latter to other bodies, relations grounded in the volumes of those bodies.


    It is by reason of these spatial relations with certain bodies,
    that a being is said to be “present” in a certain place. A
    corporeal extended substance is said to occupy space
    _circumscriptivé_, or by having parts outside parts in the place
    it occupies. A finite or created spiritual substance is said to
    occupy space _definitivé_ inasmuch as it can naturally exercise
    its influence only within certain more or less extended spatial
    limits: as the human soul does within the confines of the
    body.( ) The Infinite Being is said to occupy space _repletivé_.
    The actual presence of God in all real space, conserving in its
    existence all created, contingent reality, is called the Divine
    _Ubiquity_. The perfection whereby God can be present in other
    worlds and other spaces which He may actualize is called the
    Divine _Immensity_.

    The local presence of a finite being to other finite beings is
    itself a positive perfection—based on its actual extension if it
    be an extended corporeal substance, or on its power of operating
    within a certain space if it be a spiritual substance. The fact
    that in the case of a finite being this local presence is itself
    limited, is at once a corollary and an index of the finiteness of
    the being in question. Only the Infinite Being is omnipresent or
    ubiquitous. But every finite being, whether corporeal or
    spiritual, from the very fact that it exists at all, must exist
    somewhere or have some _locus internus_, and it must have some
    local presence if there are other corporeal, extended beings in
    existence. Thus the _local presence_ of a being is a (finite)
    perfection which seems to be grounded in the very nature itself of
    the creature.( )


From the concept of _place_ we pass naturally to the more complex and
abstract notion of _space_. It is, of course, by cognitive processes, both
sentient and intellectual, that we come into possession of the abstract
concept of space. These processes are subjective in the sense that they
are processes of the individual’s mental faculties. Distinguishing between
the processes and the object or content which is brought into
consciousness, or put in presence of the mind, by means of them; and
assuming that this object or content is not a _mere_ form or groove of our
cognitive activity, not a _mere_ antecedent condition requisite on the
mental side for the conscious exercise of this activity on its data, but
that on the contrary it is, or involves, an objective, extramental reality
apprehended by the mind,—we go on to inquire in what this objective
reality consists. In approaching the question we must first note that what
is true of every abstract and universal concept is true of the concept of
space, _viz._ that the _abstractness_ and _universality_ (“_intentio
universalitatis_”) of real being, as apprehended by the intellect, are
modes or forms of thought, _entia rationis_, logical conditions and
relations which are created by thought, and which exist only in and for
thought; while the reality itself is the object apprehended in these modes
and under these conditions: _Universale est formaliter in mente et
fundamentaliter in re_. Now through the concept of space we apprehend a
reality. Our concept of real space has for its object an actual reality.
What is this reality? If space is real, in what does its reality consist?
We answer that the reality which we apprehend through this concept is _the
total amount of the actual extension or magnitude of all created and
coexisting bodies_; not, however, this total magnitude considered
absolutely and in itself, but _as endowed with real and mutual relations
of all its parts to one another_,( ) relations which are apprehended by
us as distances, linear, superficial, and voluminal.

Such, then, is the reality corresponding to our concept of real and actual
space. But no sooner have we reached this concept than we may look at its
object in the abstract, remove mentally all limits from it, and conceive
all extended bodies as actually non-existent. What is the result? The
result is that we have now present to our minds the _possibility_ of the
existence of extended bodies, and a concomitant imagination image (which
memory will not allow us to banish from consciousness) of a vast and
boundless emptiness, an indefinite and unmeasurable vacuum in which bodies
were or may be. The intellectual concept is now not a concept of any
_actual_ object, but of a mere _possibility_: the possibility of a
corporeal, extended universe. This is the concept of what we call _ideal_
or _possible space_; and like the concept of any other possible reality it
is derived by us from our experience of actual reality,—in this case from
our experience of extended bodies as actually existing. The corporeal
universe has not existed from all eternity, but it was possible from all
eternity. When we think of that possibility as antecedent to all creation,
we are thinking of bodies, and of their extension, as possible; and the
concept of their total extension as possible is the concept of ideal or
possible space. This concept is, through a psychological necessity,
accompanied by an imagination image of what we call _imaginary space_: the
unlimited vacuity which preceded corporeal creation, which would still
persist were the latter totally annihilated, which reaches out
indefinitely beyond its actual limits, which imagination pictures for us
as a receptacle in which bodies may exist but which all the time our
reason assures us is actually nothing, being really only the known
possibility of corporeal creatures. This familiar notion of an empty
receptacle for bodies is what we have in mind when we think of bodies as
existing “_in_ space”. Hence we say that space, as conceived by the human
mind, is not a mere subjective form of cognition, a mere _ens rationis_,
inasmuch as our concept has a foundation in reality, _viz._ the actual
extension of all existing bodies; nor is it on the other hand simply a
real entity, because this actual extension of bodies does not really exist
in the manner in which we apprehend it under the abstract concept of
space, as a mere possibility, or empty receptacle, of bodies. Space is
therefore an _ens rationis cum fundamento in re_.


    A great variety of interesting but abstruse questions arise from
    the consideration of space; but they belong properly to Cosmology
    and Natural Theology. For example: Is real space actually infinite
    in magnitude, or finite? In other words, besides the whole solar
    system—which is in reality merely one star _plus_ its planets and
    their satellites,—is there in existence an actually infinite
    multitude of such stellar worlds? It is not likely that this can
    ever be determined empirically. Many philosophers maintain that
    the question must be answered in the negative, inasmuch as an
    actually infinite multitude is _impossible_. Others, however, deny
    that the impossibility of an actually infinite multitude can be
    proved.( ) Again, within the limits of the actual corporeal
    universe, are there really _vacant_ spaces, or is all space within
    these limits actually (or even necessarily) filled with an
    all-pervading ether or corporeal medium of some sort? How would
    local motion be possible if all space were full of impenetrable
    matter? How would the real interaction of distant bodies on one
    another be possible if there were only vacant space between them?
    Is the _real_ volume or extension of a corporeal substance (as
    distinct from its _apparent_ volume, which is supposed to include
    interstices, or spaces not filled with that body) actually or
    necessarily unchangeable? Or is the internal quantity of a body
    actually or necessarily unchangeable? Can more than one individual
    corporeal substance simultaneously occupy exactly the same space?
    (This is not possible naturally, for impenetrability is a natural
    consequence of local extension; but it is possible miraculously—if
    all the bodies, or all except one, be miraculously deprived of
    local or spatial extension.) Can the same individual body be
    present at the same time in totally different and distant places?
    (Not naturally, of course; but how it can happen even miraculously
    is a more difficult question than the preceding one. It is in
    virtue of its actual or local extension that a body is present
    sensibly in a definite place. Deprived miraculously of this
    extension it can be simultaneously in several places, as our
    Blessed Lord’s Body is in the Eucharist. But if a body has its
    natural local extension at one definite place, does this extension
    so confine its presence to this place that it cannot be
    simultaneously present—miraculously, and without its local
    extension—at other places? The most we can say is that the
    absolute impossibility of this is neither self-evident nor capable
    of cogent proof. The Body of our Lord has its natural local
    extension in heaven—for heaven, which will be the abode of the
    glorified bodies of the blessed after the general resurrection,
    must be not merely a state or condition, but a place—and at the
    same time it is sacramentally present in many places on earth.)


 . TIME: ITS APPREHENSION AND MEASUREMENT.—If the concept of space is
difficult to analyse, and gives rise to some practically insoluble
problems, this is still more true of the concept of time. “What, then, is
time?” exclaims St. Augustine in his _Confessions_.( ) “If no one asks
me, I know; but if I am asked to explain it, then I do not know!” We reach
the notion of space through our external perception of _extension_ by the
senses of sight and touch. So also we derive the notion of time from our
perception of _motion_ or _change_, and mainly from our consciousness of
change and succession in our own conscious states. The concept of time
involves immediately two other concepts, that of _duration_, and that of
_succession_. Duration, or continuance in existence, is of two kinds,
_permanent_ and _successive_. Permanent duration is the duration of an
_immutable_ being, formally and in so far as it is immutable. Successive
duration is the continued existence or duration of a being that is
_subject_ to change, formally and in so far as it is mutable. Now real
change involves a continuous _succession_ of real states, it is a
continuous _process_ or _fieri_; and it is the duration of a being subject
to such change that we call _time_ or _temporal duration_. Had we no
consciousness of change, or succession of states, we could have no notion
of time; though we might have a notion of unchanging duration if _per
impossibile_ our cognitive activity were itself devoid of any succession
of conscious states and had for its object only unchanging reality. But
since our cognitive activity is _de facto_ successive we can apprehend
permanent or unchanging duration, not as it is in itself, but only after
the analogy of successive or temporal duration ( ). The continuous series
of _successive states involved in change_ is, therefore, the real and
objective content of our notion of time; just as the _co-existing_ total
of _extension_ forms the content of our notion of space. The concept of
space is the concept of something static; that of time is the concept of
something kinetic. Time is the continuity of change: where there is change
there is time; without change time would be inconceivable. Change involves
succession, and succession involves the temporal elements of “before” and
“after,” separated by the indivisible limiting factor called the “now” or
“present instant”. The “past” and the “future” are the two _parts_ of
time, while the “present instant” is not a part of time, but a _point of
demarcation_ at which the future flows into the past. Change is a reality;
it is a real mode of the existence of mutable things; but neither the
immediately past state, nor the immediately future state of a changing
reality, are actual at the present instant: it is only to the permanent,
abiding mind, apprehending real change, and endowed with memory and
expectation, that the past and the future are actually (and, of course,
only _ideally_, not _really_) present. And it is only by holding past and
future in present consciousness, by distinguishing mentally between them,
by counting or measuring the continuous flow of successive states from
future to past, through the present instant, that the mind comes into
possession of the concept of time.( ) The mind thus apprehends time as
the measure of the continuous flow of successive states in things subject
to change. As thus apprehended, time is not merely the reality of change:
it is the successive continuity or duration of change considered as a
measure of change. It is that within which all changes are conceived to
happen: just as space is conceived as that within which all extended
things are conceived to exist. We have said that without real change or
motion there could be no time. We can now add that without a mind to
apprehend and measure this motion there could be no time. As St. Thomas
declares, following Aristotle: _Si non esset anima non esset tempus_.( )
For time, as apprehended by means of our abstract and universal concept,
is not simply a reality, but a reality endowed with logical relations, or,
in other words, a logical entity grounded in reality, an _ens rationis cum
fundamento in re_.

This brings us to Aristotle’s classic definition,( ) which is at once
pithy and pregnant: Τοῦτο γάρ ἐστιν ὁ χρόνος, ἀριθμὸς κινήσεως κατὰ τὸ
πρότερον καὶ ὓστερον: _Tempus est numerus motus secundum prius et
posterius_: Time is the measure of motion or change by what we conceive as
_before_ and _after_, or _future_ and _past_, in its process. Every change
involves its own intrinsic flow of states from future to past. It is by
mentally distinguishing these states, and by thus computing, counting,
numbering, the continuous flow or change, that we derive from the latter
the notion of time.( ) If, then, we consider all created things, all
things subject to change, we shall realize that real time commenced with
the creation of the first of them and will continue as long as they (or
any of them) continue to exist. We thus arrive at a conception of time in
general, analogous to that of space: _the whole continuous series of
successions, in changing things, from future to past, regarded as that in
which these changes occur, and which is the measure of them_.

Here, too, as in the case of space, we can distinguish _real time_, which
is the total duration of actual changes, from _ideal or imaginary time_
which is the conceived and imagined duration of merely possible changes.

But a more important distinction is that between _intrinsic_ or _internal
time_, or the duration of any concrete mutable reality considered in
itself, and _extrinsic_ or _external time_, which is some other extrinsic
temporal duration with which we compare, and by which we may measure, the
former duration. Every change or motion has its own internal time; and
this is what we have been so far endeavouring to analyse. If two men start
at the same instant to walk in the same direction, and if one walk three
miles and the other four, while the hands of a watch mark the lapse of an
hour, the _external time_ of each walk will be the same, will coincide
with one and the same motion of the hands of the watch used as a measure.
But the internal time of the four-mile walk will be greater than that of
the three-mile walk. The former will be a greater amount of change than
the latter; and therefore its internal time, estimated by this amount
absolutely, will be greater than that of the latter estimated by its
amount absolutely.( ) The greater the amount of a change the greater the
internal time-duration or series of successive states which measures this
change absolutely.( )

Just as the category _Where_ is indicated by the spatial relations of a
body to other bodies, so the category _When_ is indicated, in regard to
any event or process, by its commensuration or comparison with other
events or processes.

This brings us to the notion of measurement. To measure anything
quantitatively is to apply to it successively some quantitative unit taken
as a standard and to count the number of times it contains this unit. This
is a process of mentally breaking up continuous quantity or
_magnitude_—whether permanent or successive, _i.e._ whether extension or
motion—into discontinuous quantity or _multitude_. If the measurement of
permanent quantity by spatial units, and the choosing of such units, are
difficult processes,( ) those of measuring successive quantity and
fixing on temporal units are more difficult still. Is there any natural
motion or change of a general character, whereby we can measure
(externally) the time-duration of all other changes? The motions of the
earth itself—on its axis and around the sun—at once suggest themselves.
And these motions form in fact the _natural_ general standard for
measuring the time of all other events in the universe. All _artificial_
or mechanical devices, such as hour-glasses, watches, clocks,
chronometers, etc., are simply contrivances for the more convenient
application of that general and natural standard to all particular events.

It requires a little reflection to realize that all our means of measuring
time-duration can only attain to _approximate_ accuracy, inasmuch as our
faculties of sense perception, no matter by what devices they are aided,
are so limited in range and penetration that fluctuations which fall below
the _minima sensibilia_ cannot be detected. It is a necessary condition of
any motion used as a standard for time-measurement that it be _regular_.
That the standard motions we actually employ are _absolutely_ regular we
have no guarantee. We can test their regularity only up to the point at
which our power of detecting irregularity fails.

Reflection will also show that our appreciation of time-duration is also
_relative_, not absolute. It is always a comparison of one flow or current
of conscious experiences with another. It is the greater regularity of
astronomical motions, as compared with changes or processes experienced as
taking place within ourselves, that causes us to fix on the former as the
more suitable standard for the measurement of time. “There is indeed,”
writes Father Maher,( ) “a certain rhythm in many of the processes of
our organic life, such as respiration, circulation, and the recurrent
needs of food and sleep, which probably contribute much to our power of
estimating duration.... The irregular character and varying duration of
conscious states, however, soon bring home to us the unfitness of these
subjective phenomena to serve as a standard measure of time.” Moreover,
our estimate of duration is largely dependent on the nature of the
estimated experiences and of our mental attitude towards them: “A period
with plenty of varied incident, such as a fortnight’s travel, passes
rapidly _at the time_. Whilst we are interested in each successive
experience we have little spare attention to notice the duration of the
experience. There is almost complete lapse of the ‘enumerating’ activity.
But _in retrospect_ such a period expands, because it is estimated by the
number and variety of the impressions which it presents to recollection.
On the other hand a dull, monotonous, or unattractive occupation, which
leaves much of our mental energy free to advert to its duration, is
over-estimated whilst taking place. A couple of hours spent impatiently
waiting for a train, a few days in idleness on board ship, a week confined
to one’s room, are often declared to constitute an ‘age’. But when they
are past such periods, being empty of incident, shrink up into very small
dimensions.... Similarly, recent intervals are exaggerated compared with
equal periods more remote. Whilst as we grow older and new experiences
become fewer and less impressive, each year at its close seems shorter
than its predecessor.”( )


    From those facts it would seem perfectly legitimate to draw this
    rather surprising inference: that if the rate of _all_ the changes
    taking place in the universe were to be suddenly and
    simultaneously altered in the same direction—all increased or all
    diminished in the same degree—and _if our powers of perception
    were simultaneously_ so altered as to be _readjusted to this new
    rate_ of change, _we could not become aware of the
    alteration_.( ) Supposing, for instance, that the rate of motion
    were doubled, the same amount of change would take place in the
    new day as actually took place in the old. The _external or
    comparative_ time of all movements—that is to say, the time of
    which alone we can have any appreciation—would be the same as of
    old. The new day would, of course, appear only half as long as the
    old to a mind not readjusted to the new conditions; but this would
    still be external time. But would the _internal_, _intrinsic_ time
    of each movement be unaltered? It would be the same for the
    readjusted mind as it was previously for the mind adjusted to
    these previous conditions. By an unaltered mind, however, by the
    Divine Mind, for instance, the same amount of motion would be seen
    to constitute the same movement under both conditions, but to take
    place twice as quickly under the new conditions as it did under
    the old. This again, however, involves a comparison, and thus
    informs us merely of external or relative time. If we identify
    intrinsic time with _amount of change_, making the latter the
    measure of the former, we must conclude that alteration in the
    _rate_ of a motion does not alter its absolute time: and this is
    evident when we reflect that the very notion of a _rate_ of motion
    involves the comparison of the latter with some other motion.( )
    Finally, we have no positive conception of the manner in which
    time duration is related to, or known by, the Divine Eternal Mind,
    which is present to all time—past, present and future.

    Besides the question of the relativity of time, there are many
    other curious and difficult questions which arise from a
    consideration of time-duration, but a detailed consideration of
    them belongs to Cosmology. We will merely indicate a few of them.
    How far is time _reversible_, at least in the case of purely
    mechanical movements?( ) Had time a beginning? We know from
    Revelation that _de facto_ it had. But can we determine by the
    light of reason alone whether or not it _must_ have had a
    beginning? The greatest philosophers are divided as to possibility
    or impossibility of _created_ reality existing _from all
    eternity_. St. Thomas has stated, as his considered opinion, that
    the impossibility of _creatio ab aeterno_ cannot be proved. If a
    series of creatures could have existed successively from all
    eternity, and therefore without any _first_ term of the series,
    this would involve the possibility of an _actually infinite
    multitude_ of creatures; but an actually infinite multitude of
    creatures, whether existing simultaneously or successively, is
    regarded by most philosophers as being self-contradictory and
    intrinsically impossible. And this although the Divine Essence,
    being infinitely imitable _ad extra_, and being clearly
    comprehended as such by the Divine Mind, contains virtually the
    Divine exemplars of an infinite multitude of possible creatures.
    Those who defend the possibility of an actually infinite multitude
    of creatures consider this fact of the infinite imitability of the
    Divine Essence as the ground of this possibility. On the other
    hand, those who hold that an actually infinite multitude is
    self-contradictory deny the validity of this argument from
    possibility to actuality; and they bring forward such serious
    considerations and arguments in favour of their own view that this
    latter has been at all times much more commonly advocated than the
    former one.( ) Will time have an end? All the evidence of the
    physical sciences confirms the truth of the Christian faith that
    external time, as measured by the motions of the heavens, will
    have an end. But the internal or intrinsic time which will be the
    measure of the activities of immortal creatures will have no
    end.( )


 . DURATION OF IMMUTABLE BEING: ETERNITY.—We have seen that _duration_ is
the perseverance or continuance of a being in its existence. The duration
of the Absolutely Immutable Being is a positive perfection identical with
the essence itself of this Being. It is a duration without beginning,
without end, without change or succession, a _permanent_ as distinct from
a _successive_ duration, for it is the duration of the Necessary Being,
whose essence is Pure Actuality. This duration is eternity: _an
interminable duration existing all together_. _Aeternitas est
interminabilis duratio tota simul existens._ This is the common definition
of eternity in the proper sense of the term—absolute or necessary
eternity. The word “_interminabilis_” connotes a _positive_ perfection:
the exclusion of beginning and end. The word “_tota_” does not imply that
the eternity has parts. The expression “_tota simul_” excludes the
imperfection which is characteristic of time duration, _viz._ the
_succession_ of “before” and “after”. The definition given by Boëtius( )
emphasizes these points, as also the indefectible character of immutable
life in the Eternal Being: _Aeternitas est interminabilis vitae tota simul
et prefecta possessio_.

There is, in the next place, a kind of duration which has been called
_hypothetical_, _relative_, or _borrowed_ eternity: _aeternitas
hypothetica_, _relativa_, _participata_, also called by scholastics
“_aeviternitas_”. It is the duration in existence of a being that is
contingent, but _of its nature incorruptible, immortal_, such as the human
soul or a pure spirit. Even if such a being existed from all eternity its
existence would be contingent, dependent on a real principle distinct from
itself: its duration, therefore, would not be eternity in the strict
sense. On the other hand, once created by God, its nature would demand
conservation without end; nor could it naturally cease to exist, though
absolutely speaking it could cease to exist were God to withdraw from it
His conserving power. Its duration, therefore, differs from the duration
of corporeal creatures which are by nature subject to change, decay, and
cessation of their being. A contingent spiritual substance has by nature a
beginning to its duration, or at least a duration which is not essential
to it but dependent on the Necessary Being, a duration, however, which is
naturally without end; whereas the duration of the corporeal being has by
nature both a beginning and an end.


    But philosophers are not agreed as to the nature and ground of the
    distinction between these two kinds of duration in contingent
    beings. No contingent being is self-existent, neither has any
    contingent being the principle of its own duration in its own
    essence. Just as it cannot begin to exist of itself, so neither
    can it continue to exist of itself. At the same time, granted that
    it has obtained from God actual existence, some kind or degree of
    duration, of continuance in that existence, seems to be naturally
    due to its essence. Otherwise conservation would be not only
    really but formally a continued creation. It is such indeed on the
    part of God: in God there is no variety of activity. But on the
    part of the creature, the preservation of the latter in existence,
    and therefore some degree of duration, seems to be due to it on
    the hypothesis that it has been brought into existence at all. The
    _conserving_ influence of God is to its duration in existence what
    the _concurring_ influence of God is to the exercise of its
    activities.( ) In this sense the duration of a finite being in
    existence is a positive perfection which we may regard as a
    property of its nature. But is this perfection or property of the
    creature which we call _duration_, (_a_) essentially _successive_
    in all creatures, spiritual as well as corporeal? And (_b_) is it
    really identical with their actual existence (or with the reality
    of whatever change or actualization occurs to their existence), or
    it is a _mode_ of this existence or change, really distinct from
    the latter and conferring upon the latter the perfection of
    continuity or persistence?

    This, at all events, is universally admitted: that _we_ cannot
    become aware of any duration otherwise than through our
    apprehension of _change_; that we have direct knowledge only of
    _successive_ duration; that we can conceive the _permanent_
    duration of immutable reality only after the analogy of successive
    duration, or as the co-existence of immutable reality with the
    successive duration of mutable things.

    Now some philosophers identify successive duration with change,
    and hold that successive duration is formally the duration of
    things subject to change; that in so far as a being is subject to
    change its duration is successive, and in so far as it is free
    from change its duration approaches the essentially permanent
    duration of the Eternal, Immutable Being; that therefore the
    duration of corporeal, corruptible, mortal beings is _par
    excellence_ successive or temporal duration (_tempus_); that
    spiritual beings, which are substantially immutable, but
    nevertheless have a successive series of spiritual activities,
    have a sort of duration more perfect, because more permanent, than
    mere temporal duration, but less perfect, because less permanent,
    than eternal duration (_aevum_, _aeviternitas_); while the
    Absolutely Immutable Being alone has perfect permanent duration
    (_aeternitas_).( ) It is not clear whether according to this
    view we should distinguish between the duration of spiritual
    _substances_ as permanent, and that of their _acts_ as successive;
    or why we should not attribute _permanent_ duration to corporeal
    _substances_ and their _permanent accidents_, confining successive
    duration formally to motion or change itself. It is, moreover,
    implied in this view that duration is not any really distinct
    perfection or mode superadded to the actuality of the being that
    endures.

    Other philosophers hold that _all_ duration of _creatures_ is
    _successive_; that no individual creature has a mixture of
    permanent and successive duration; that this successive duration
    is really distinct from that which endures by means of it; that it
    is really distinct even from the reality of change or motion
    itself; that it is a _real mode_ the formal function of which is
    to confer on the enduring reality a series of _actualities in the
    order of_ “_succession of posterior to prior_,” a series of
    intrinsic _quandocationes_ (analagous to the intrinsic locations
    which their extension confers upon bodies in space). These
    philosophers distinguish between _continuous_ or (indefinitely)
    _divisible_ successive duration, the (indefinitely divisible)
    parts of which are “past” and “future,” and the present not a
    “part” but only an “indivisible limit” between the two parts; and
    _discontinuous_ or _indivisible_ successive duration, whose parts
    are separate and indivisible units of duration succeeding one
    another discontinuously: each part being a real but indivisible
    duration, so that besides the parts that are _past_ and _future_,
    the _present_ is also a _part_, which is—like an instant of
    time—indivisible, but which is also—unlike an instant of time—a
    real duration. The former kind of successive duration they ascribe
    to corporeal, corruptible creatures; the latter to spiritual,
    incorruptible creatures. This view is defended with much force and
    ingenuity by De San in his _Cosmologia_;( ) where also a full
    discussion of most of the other questions we have touched upon
    will be found.





CHAPTER XII. RELATION; THE RELATIVE AND THE ABSOLUTE.


 . IMPORTANCE OF THE PRESENT CATEGORY.—An analysis of the concept of
_Relation_ will be found to have a very direct bearing both on the Theory
of Being and on the Theory of Knowledge. For the human mind knowledge is
embodied in the mental act of judgment, and this is an act of
_comparison_, an act whereby we _relate_ or _refer_ one concept to
another. The act of cognition itself involves a relation between the
knowing subject and the known object, between the mind and reality.
Reality itself is understood only by our mentally recognizing or
establishing relations between the objects which make up for us the whole
knowable universe. This universe we apprehend not as a multitude of
isolated, unconnected individuals, but as an _ordered whole_ whose parts
are _inter-related_ by their mutual _co-ordinations_ and _subordinations_.
The _order_ we apprehend in the universe results from these various
inter-relations whereby we apprehend it as a _system_. What we call a _law
of nature_, for instance, is nothing more or less than the expression of
some constant relation which we believe to exist between certain parts of
this system. The study of _Relation_, therefore, belongs not merely to
Logic or the Theory of Knowledge, but also to the Theory of Being, to
Metaphysics. What, then, is a relation? What is the object of this mental
concept which we express by the term _relation_? Are there in the known
and knowable universe of our experience _real_ relations? Or are all
relations _merely logical_, pure creations of our cognitive activity? Can
we classify relations, whether real or logical? What constitutes a
relation formally? What are the properties or characteristics of
relations? These are some of the questions we must attempt to answer.

Again, there is much ambiguity, and not a little error, in the use of the
terms “absolute” and “relative” in modern philosophy. To some of these
sources of confusion we have referred already ( ). It is a commonplace of
modern philosophy, a thing accepted as unquestioned and unquestionable,
that we know, and can know, only the relative. There is a true sense in
this, but the true sense is not the generally accepted one.

Considering the order in which our knowledge of reality progresses it is
unquestionable that we first simply perceive “things” successively, things
more or less _similar_ or _dissimilar_, without realizing _in what_ they
agree or differ. To realize the latter involves _reflection_ and
_comparison_. Similarly we perceive “events” in succession, events some of
which _depend on_ others, but without at first noting or realizing this
dependence. In other words we apprehend at first _apart from their
relations_, or _as absolute_, things and events which are really relative;
and we do so spontaneously, without realizing even that we perceive them
as absolute.

The seed needs soil and rain and sunshine for its growth; but these do not
need the seed. The turbine needs the water, but the water does not need
the turbine. When we realize such facts as these, _by reflection_,
contrasting what is dependent with what is independent, what is like or
unlike, before or after, greater or less than, other things, with what
each of these is in itself, we come into conscious possession of the
notion of “the relative” and oppose this to the notion of “the absolute”.

What we conceive as dependent we conceive as relative; what we conceive,
by negation, as independent, we conceive as absolute. Then by further
observation and reflection we gradually realize that what we apprehended
as independent of certain things is dependent on certain other things;
that the same thing may be independent in some respects and dependent in
other respects. The rain does not depend on the seed which it causes to
germinate, but it does depend on the clouds. The water which turns the
turbine does not depend on the turbine, but it does depend on the rain;
and the rain depends on the evaporation of the waters of the ocean; and
the evaporation on the solar heat; and this again on chemical and physical
processes in the sun; and so on, as far as sense experience will carry us:
until we realize that everything which falls directly within this sense
experience is dependent and therefore relative. Similarly, the accident of
quantity, in virtue of which we pronounce one of two bodies to be _larger_
than the other, is something _absolute_ as compared with this _relation_
itself; but as compared with the substance in which it inheres, it is
dependent on the latter, or _relative_ to the latter, while the substance
is _absolute_, or free from dependence on it. But if substance is absolute
as compared with accident, in the sense that substance is not dependent on
a subject in which to inhere, but exists _in itself_, it is not absolute
in the sense understood by Spinoza, in the sense of existing _of itself_,
independently of any efficient cause to account for its origin ( ). All
the substances in the universe of our direct sense experience are
contingent, dependent _ab alio_, and therefore in this sense relative, not
absolute.

This is the true sense in which relativity is an essential note of the
reality of all the data of the world of our sense experience. They are all
contingent, or relative, or conditioned existences. And, as Kant rightly
taught, this experience forces us inevitably to think of a Necessary,
Absolute, Unconditioned Being, on whom these all depend. But, as can be
proved in _Natural Theology_ against Kant, this concept is not a mere
regulative idea of the reason, a form of thought whereby we systematize
our experience: it is a concept the object of which is not merely a
necessity of thought but also an objectively existing reality.( )


    But in the thought of most modern philosophers relativism, or the
    doctrine that “we can know only the relative,” is something very
    different from all this. For positivists, disciples of Auguste
    Comte ( - ), it means that we can know only the phenomena
    which fall under the notice of our senses, and the laws of
    resemblance, succession, etc., according to which they occur. All
    “theological” quests for supra-mundane causes and reasons of these
    events, and all “metaphysical” quests for suprasensible forces,
    powers, influences, in the events themselves, as explaining or
    accounting for these latter, are according to this theory
    necessarily futile: the mind must rest content with a knowledge of
    the _positive facts_ of sense, and their relations. Relativism is
    thus another name for Positivism.

    For the psychological sensism of English philosophers from Hobbes
    [ - ] and Locke [ - ] down to Mill [ - ] and Bain
    [ - ] relativism means that all conscious cognition—which
    they tend to reduce to modes and complexes of _sensation_—must be,
    and can only be, a cognition of the changing, the transitional,
    the relative.( ) According to an extreme form of this theory the
    mind can apprehend only relations, but not the terms of any of
    these relations: it can apprehend nothing as absolute. Moreover
    the relations which it apprehends it creates itself. Thus all
    reality is reduced to a system of relations. For Mill the supreme
    category of real being was _Sensation_: but sensation can be only
    a feeling of a relation: thus the supreme category of real being
    would be _Relation_.( )

    But the main current of relativism is that which has issued from
    Kant’s philosophy and worked itself out in various currents such
    as Spencer’s Agnosticism, Hegel’s Monism, and Renouvier’s
    Neo-criticism.( ) The mind can know only what is related to it,
    what is present to it, what is in it; not what is apart from it,
    distinct from it. The mind cannot know the real nature of the
    extramental, nor even if there be an extramental real. Subject and
    object in knowledge are really one: individual minds are only
    self-conscious phases in the ever-evolving reality of the One Sole
    Actual Being.

    These are but a few of the erroneous currents of modern
    relativism. A detailed analysis of them belongs to the _Theory of
    Knowledge_. But it may be pointed out here that they are erroneous
    because they have distorted and exaggerated certain profound
    truths concerning the scope and limits of human knowledge.

    It is true that we have no positive, proper, intuitive knowledge
    of the Absolute Being who is the First Cause and Last End of the
    universe; that all our knowledge of the nature and attributes of
    the Infinite Being is negative, analogical, abstractive. In a
    certain sense, therefore, He is above the scope of our faculties;
    He is Incomprehensible. But it is false to say that He is
    Unknowable; that our knowledge of Him, inadequate and imperfect as
    it is, is not genuine, real, and instructive, as far as it goes.

    Again, a _distinct_ knowledge of any object implies _defining_,
    _limiting_, _distinguishing_, _comparing_, _relating_, _judging_;
    _analysing and synthesizing_. It implies therefore that we
    apprehend things _in relations_ with other things. But this
    supposes an antecedent, if indistinct, apprehension of the
    “things” themselves. Indeed we cannot help pronouncing as simply
    unintelligible the contention that all knowledge is of relations,
    and that we can have no knowledge of things as absolute. How could
    we become aware of relations without being aware of the terms
    related? Spencer himself admits that the very reasoning whereby we
    establish the “relativity of knowledge” leads us inevitably to
    assert as necessary the existence of the non-relative, the
    Absolute:( ) a necessity which Kant also recognizes.

    Finally, the fact that reality, in order to be known, must be
    present to the knowing mind—or, in other words, that knowledge
    itself is a relation between object and subject—in no way
    justifies the conclusion that we cannot know the real nature of
    things as they are in themselves, absolutely, but only our own
    subjective, mental impressions or representations of the absolute
    reality, in itself unknowable.( ) The obvious fact that any
    reality in order to be known must be related to the knowing mind,
    seems to be regarded by some philosophers as if it were a
    momentous discovery. Then, conceiving the “thing-in-itself,” the
    absolute, as a something standing out of all relation to mind,
    they declare solemnly that we cannot know the absolute: a
    declaration which may be interpreted either as a mere truism—that
    we cannot know a thing without knowing it!—or as a purely
    gratuitous assertion, that besides the world of realities which
    reveal themselves to our minds there is another world of
    unattained and unattainable “things-in-themselves” which are as it
    were the _real_ realities! These philosophers have yet to show
    that there is anything absurd or impossible in the view that there
    is simply one world of realities—realities which exist absolutely
    in themselves apart from our apprehension of them and which in the
    process of cognition come into relation with our minds.( )
    Moreover, if besides this world of known and knowable realities
    there were such a world of “transcendental” things-in-themselves
    as these philosophers discourse of, such a world would have very
    little concern for us,( ) since by definition and _ex hypothesi_
    it would be _for us_ necessarily as if it were not: indeed the
    hypothesis of such a transcendental world is self-contradictory,
    for even did it exist we could not think of it.

    The process of cognition has indeed its difficulties and
    mysteries. To examine these, to account for the possibility of
    truth and error, to analyse the grounds and define the scope and
    limits of human certitude, are problems for the _Theory of
    Knowledge_, on the domain of which we are trenching perhaps too
    far already in the present context. But at all events to conceive
    reality as absolute in the sense of being totally unrelated to
    mind, and then to ask: Is reality so transformed in the very
    process of cognition that the mind cannot possibly apprehend it or
    represent it as it really is?—this certainly is to misconceive and
    mis-state in a hopeless fashion the main problem of Epistemology.


 . ANALYSIS OF THE CONCEPT OF RELATION.—Relation is one of those ultimate
concepts which does not admit of definition proper. And like other
ultimate concepts it is familiar to all. Two lines, each measuring a yard,
are _equal_ to each other _in length_: _equality_ is a _quantitative_
relation. The number   is _half_ of  , and   is _twice_  : _half_ and
_double_ express each a _quantitative_ relation of _inequality_. If two
twin brothers are _like_ each other we have the _qualitative_ relation of
_resemblance_ or _similarity_; if a negro and a European are _unlike_ each
other we have the _qualitative_ relation of _dissimilarity_. The steam of
the locomotive moves the train: a relation of _efficient causality_, of
efficient cause to effect. The human eye is adapted to the function of
seeing: a relation of _purpose_ or _finality_, of means to end. And so on.

The objective concept of relation thus establishes a _conceptual unity_
between a pair of things in the domain of some other category. Like
quantity, quality, _actio_ and _passio_, etc., it is an ultimate mode of
reality as apprehended through human experience. But while the reality of
the other accident-categories appertains to substances considered
absolutely or in isolation from one another, the reality of this category
which we call _relation_ appertains indivisibly to two (or more) together,
so that when one of these is taken or considered apart from the other (or
others) the relation formally disappears. Each of the other (absolute)
accidents is formally “something” (“_aliquid_”; “τι”), whereas the formal
function of _relation_ is to refer something “to something” else (“_ad
aliquid_”; “πρός τι”). The other accidents formally inhere in a subject,
“habent _esse in_ subjecto”; relation, considered formally as such, does
not inhere in a subject, but gives the latter a respect, or bearing, or
reference, or ordination, _to_ or _towards_ something else: “relatio dat
subjecto respectum vel _esse ad_ aliquid aliud”. The length of each of two
lines is an _absolute_ accident of that line, but the _relation_ of
equality or inequality is intelligible only of both together. Destroy one
line and the relation is destroyed, though the other line retains its
length absolutely and unaltered. And so of the other examples just given.
Relation, then, considered formally as such, is not an absolute accident
inhering in a subject, but is a reference of this subject to some other
thing, this latter being called the _term_ of the relation. Hence relation
is described by the scholastics as the _ordination or respect or reference
of one thing to another_: _ordo vel respectus vel habitudo unius ad
aliud_. The relation of a subject to something else as term is formally
not anything absolute, “_aliquid_” in that subject, but merely refers this
subject to something else as term, “_ad aliquid_”. Hence Aristotle’s
designation of relation as “πρός τι,” “_ad aliquid_,” “to or towards
something”. “We conceive as relations [πρός τι],” he says, “those things
whose very entity itself we regard as being somehow _of_ other things or
_to_ another thing.”( )

To constitute a relation of whatsoever kind, three elements or factors are
essential: the _two extremes_ of the relation, viz. the _subject_ of the
relation and the _term_ to which the subject is referred, and what is
called the _foundation_, or basis, or ground, or reason, of the relation
(_fundamentum_ relationis). This latter is the cause or reason on account
of which the subject bears the relation to its term. It is always
something absolute, in the extremes of the relation. Hence it follows that
we may regard any relation in two ways, either _formally_ as the actual
bond or link of connexion between the extremes, or _fundamentally_, _i.e._
as in its cause or foundation in these extremes. This is expressed
technically by distinguishing between the relation _secundum esse in_ and
_secundum esse ad_, _i.e._ between the absolute entity of its foundation
in the subject and the purely relative entity in which the relation itself
formally consists. Needless to say, the latter, whatever it is, does not
add any _absolute entity_ to that of either extreme. But in what does this
relative entity itself consist? Before attempting an answer to this
question we must endeavour to distinguish, in the next section ( ),
between _purely logical_ relations and relations which are in some true
sense _real_. Here we may note certain corollaries from the concept of
relation as just analysed.

Realities of which the objective concept of relation is verified derive
from this latter certain _properties_ or special characteristics. The
_first_ of these is _reciprocity_: two related extremes are as such
intelligible only in reference to each other: father to son, half to
double, like to like, etc., and _vice versa_: _Correlativa se invicem
connotant_. The _second_ is that things related to one another are
collateral or concomitant in _nature_: _Correlativa sunt simul natura_:
neither related extreme is as such naturally prior to the other. This is
to be understood of the relation only in its _formal_ aspect, not
fundamentally. Fundamentally or _materialiter_, the cause for instance is
_naturally prior_ to its effect. The _third_ is that related things are
concomitant _logically_, or in the order of knowledge: _Correlativa sunt
simul cognitione_: a reality can be known and defined as relative to
another reality only by the simultaneous cognition of both extremes of the
relation.

 . LOGICAL RELATIONS.—Logical relations are _those which are created by
our own thought, and which can have no being other than the being which
they have in and for our thought_. That there are such relations, which
are the exclusive product of our thought-activity, is universally
admitted. The mind can reflect on its own direct concepts; it can compare
and co-ordinate and subordinate them among themselves; it thus forms ideas
of relations between those concepts, ideas which the scholastics call
_reflex_ or _logical_ ideas, or “_secundæ intentiones mentis_”. These
relations are _entia rationis_, purely logical relations. Such, for
instance, are the relations of _genus_ to _species_, of predicate to
subject, the relations described in Logic as the _prædicabilia_. Moreover
we can compare our direct universal concepts with the individual realities
they represent, and see that this feature or mode of _universality_ in the
concept, its “_intentio universalitatis_” is a _logical relation_ of the
concept to the reality which it represents: a logical relation, inasmuch
as its _subject_ (the concept) and its _foundation_ (the _abstractness_ of
the concept) are in themselves pure products of our thought-activity.
Furthermore, we are forced by the imperfection of the thought-processes
whereby we apprehend reality—conception of _abstract_ ideas, _limitation_
of concepts in extension and intension, _affirmation_ and _negation_,
etc.—to apprehend _conceptual_ limitations, negations, comparisons, etc.,
in a word, all _logical entities_, as if they were _realities_, or after
the manner of realities, _i.e._ to conceive what is really “nothing” as if
it were really “something,” to conceive the _non-ens_ as if it were an
_ens_, to conceive it _per modum entis_ ( ). And when we compare these
logical entities with one another, or with real entities, the relations
thus established by our thought are all _logical relations_. Finally, it
follows from this same imperfection in our human modes of thought that we
sometimes understand things only by attributing to these certain logical
relations, _i.e._ relations which affect not the reality of these things,
their _esse reale_, but only the mode of their presence in our minds,
their _esse ideale_ ( ).


    In view of the distinction between logical relations and those we
    shall presently describe as real relations, and especially in view
    of the prevalent tendency in modern philosophy to regard all
    relations as merely logical, it would be desirable to classify
    logical relations and to indicate the ways in which they are
    created by, or result from, our thought-processes. We know of no
    more satisfactory analysis than that accomplished by St. Thomas
    Aquinas in various parts of his many monumental and enduring
    works. In his _Commentaries on the Sentences_( ) he enumerates
    four ways in which logical relations arise from our
    thought-processes. In his _Quaestiones Disputatae_( ) he reduces
    these to two: some logical relations, he says, are invented by the
    intellect reflecting on its own concepts and are attributed to
    these concepts; others arise from the fact that the intellect can
    understand things only by relating, grouping, classifying them,
    only by introducing among them an _arrangement_ or _system of
    relations_ through which alone it can understand them, relations
    which it could only erroneously ascribe to these things as they
    really exist, since they are only projected, as it were, into
    these things by the mind. Thus, though it consciously thinks of
    these things as so related, it deliberately abstains from
    asserting that these relations really affect the things
    themselves. Now the mistake of all those philosophers, whether
    ancient, medieval or modern, who deny that any relations are real,
    seems to be that they carry this abstention too far. They contend
    that all relations are simply read into the reality by our
    thought; that none are in the reality in any true sense
    independently of our thought. They thus exaggerate the rôle of
    thought as a _constitutive_ factor of known or experienced
    reality; and they often do so to such a degree that according to
    their philosophy human thought not merely _discovers_ or _knows_
    reality but practically _constitutes_ or _creates_ it: or at all
    events to such a degree that cognition would be mainly a process
    whereby reality is assimilated to mind and not rather a process
    whereby mind is assimilated to reality. Against all such idealist
    tendencies in philosophy we assert that not all relations are
    logical, that there are some relations which are not mere products
    of thought, but which are themselves real.


 . REAL RELATIONS; THEIR EXISTENCE VINDICATED.—A real relation is _one
which is not a mere product of thought, but which obtains between real
things independently of our thought_. For a real relation there must be
(_a_) a _real_, individual _subject_; (_b_) a _real foundation_; and (_c_)
a _real_, individual _term_, really distinct from the subject. If the
subject of the relation, or its foundation, be not real, but a mere _ens
rationis_, obviously the relation cannot be more than logical. If,
moreover, the term be not a really distinct entity from the subject, then
the relation can be nothing more than a mental comparison of some thing
with itself, either under the same aspect or under mentally distinct
aspects. A relation is real in the fullest sense when the extremes are
_mutually_ related in virtue of a foundation really existing in both.
Hence St Thomas’ definition of a real relation as a _connexion between
some two things in virtue of something really found in both_: _habitudo
inter aliqua duo secundum aliquid realiter conveniens utrique_.( )

Now the question: Are there in the real world, among the things which make
up the universe of our experience, relations which are not merely logical,
which are not a mere product of our thought?—can admit of only one
reasonable answer. That there are relations which are in some true sense
real and independent of our thought-activity must be apparent to everyone
whose mental outlook on things has not been warped by the specious
sophistries of some form or other of Subjective Idealism. For _ex
professo_ refutations of Idealist theories the student must consult
treatises on the _Theory of Knowledge_. A few considerations on the
present point will be sufficiently convincing here.

First, then, let us appeal to the familiar examples mentioned above. Are
not two lines, each a yard long, _really equal_ in length, whether we know
it or not? Is not a line a yard long _really greater than_ another line a
foot in length, whether we know it or not? Surely our thought does not
_create_ but _discovers_ the equality or inequality. The twin brothers
_really resemble_ each other, even when no one is thinking of this
resemblance; the resemblance is there whether anyone adverts to it or not.
The motion of the train _really depends_ on the force of the steam; it is
not our thought that produces this relation of dependence. The eye is
_really_ so constructed as to perceive light, and the light is really such
by nature as to arouse the sensation of vision; surely it is not our
thought that produces this relation of mutual adaptation in these
realities. Such relations are, therefore, in some true sense real and
independent of our thought: unless indeed we are prepared to say with
idealists that the lines, the brothers, the train, the steam, the eye, and
the light—in a word, that not merely relations, but all accidents and
substances, all realities—are mere products of thought, ideas, states of
consciousness.

Again, _order_ is but a system of relations of co-ordination and
subordination between really distinct things. But there is real order in
the universe. And therefore there are real relations in the universe.
There is real order in the universe: In the physical universe do we not
experience a real subordination of effects to causes, a real adaptation of
means to ends? And in the moral universe is not this still more apparent?
The domestic society, the family, is not merely an aggregate of
individuals any one of whom we may designate indiscriminately husband or
wife, father or mother, brother or sister. These relations of order are
real; they are obviously not the product of our thought, not produced by
it, but only discovered, apprehended by it.

It is a profound truth that not all the reality of the universe which
presents itself to the human mind for analysis and interpretation, _not
all_ the reality of this universe, is to be found in the mere sum-total of
the individual entities that constitute it, considering these entities
each absolutely and in isolation from the others. Nor does _all_ its real
perfection consist in the mere sum-total of the absolute perfections
intrinsic to, and inherent in, those various individual entities. Over and
above these individual entities and their absolute perfections, there is a
domain of reality, and of real perfections, consisting in the real
_adaptation_, _interaction_, _interdependence_, _arrangement_,
_co-ordination_ and _subordination_, of those absolute entities and
perfections among themselves. And if we realize this profound truth( )
we shall have no difficulty in recognizing that, while the
thought-processes whereby we interpret this universe produce logical
relations which we utilize in this interpretation, there is also in this
universe itself a system of relations which are real, which are not
invented, but are merely detected, by our minds.

According to idealists, relation is a subjective category of the mind. It
belongs to phenomena only on the introduction of the latter into the
understanding. “Laws no more exist in phenomena,” writes Kant,( ) “than
phenomena exist in themselves; the former are relative to the subject in
which the phenomena inhere, in so far as this subject is endowed with
understanding; just as the latter are relative to this same subject in so
far as it is endowed with sensibility.” This is ambiguous and misleading.
Of course, laws or any other relations do not exist _for us_, are _not
known_ by us, are not _brought into relation to our understanding_, as
long as we do not consciously grasp the two terms and the foundation on
which the law, or any other relation, rests. But there are relations whose
terms and foundations are anterior to, and independent of, our thought,
and which consequently are not a product of thought.

“Sensations, or other feelings being given,” writes J. S. Mill,( )
“succession and simultaneousness are the two conditions to the alternative
of which they are subjected by the nature of our faculties.” But, as M.
Boirac pertinently asks,( ) “why do we apply in any particular case the
one alternative of the two-faced category rather than the other? Is it not
because in every case the concrete application made by our faculties is
determined by the objects themselves, by an objective and real foundation
of the relation?”

 . MUTUAL AND MIXED RELATIONS; TRANSCENDENTAL RELATIONS.—There are, then,
relations which are in some true sense real. But in what does the reality
of a real relation consist? Before answering this question we must examine
the main classes of real relations.

We have already referred to the _mutual_ relation as one which has _a real
foundation in both_ of the extremes, such as the relation between father
and son, or between a greater and a lesser quantity, or between two equal
quantities, or between two similar people.( ) Such a relation is called
a _relatio aequiperantiae_, a relation of _the same denomination_, if it
has the same name on both sides, as “_equal—equal_,” “_similar—similar_,”
“_friend—friend_,” etc. It is called a _relatio disquiperantiae_, of
_different denomination_, if it has a different name, indicating a
different kind of relation, on either side, as “_father—son_,”
“_cause—effect_,” “_master—servant_,” etc.

Distinct from this is the _non-mutual_ or _mixed_ relation, which has a
real foundation only in one extreme, so that the relation of this to the
other extreme is real, while the relation of the latter to the former is
only logical.( ) For instance, the relation of every creature to the
Creator is a real relation, for the essential dependence of the creature
on the Creator is a relation grounded in the very nature of the creature
as a contingent being. But the relation of the Creator to the creature is
only logical, for the creative act on which it is grounded implies in the
Creator no reality distinct from His substance, which substance has no
necessary relation to any creature. Similarly, the relation of the
(finite) knowing mind to the known object is a real relation, for it is
grounded in a new quality, _viz._ knowledge, whereby the mind is
perfected. But the relation of the object to the mind is not a real
relation, for by becoming actually known the object itself does not
undergo any real change or acquire any new reality or perfection. We have
seen already ( ,  ) that all reality has a _transcendental_ or
_essential_ relation to intellect and to will, ontological truth and
ontological goodness. These relations of reality to the _Divine_ Intellect
and Will are _formally_ or _actually_ verified in all things; whereas the
transcendental truth and goodness of any thing in regard to any created
intellect and will are formal or actual only when that thing is _actually_
known and willed by such created faculties: the relations of a thing to a
mind that does not actually know and desire that thing are only
_fundamental_ or _potential_ truth and goodness. This brings us to a
second great division of relations, into _essential_ or _transcendental_
and _accidental_ or _predicamental_.

An essential or transcendental relation is _one which is involved in the
very essence itself of the related thing_. It enters into and is
inseparable from the concept of the latter. Thus in the concept of the
_creature_ as such there is involved an _essential_ relation of the
latter’s dependence on the _Creator_. So, too, every individual reality
involves essential relations of _identity_ with itself and _distinction_
from other things, and essential relations of _truth_ and _goodness_ to
the Divine Mind and created minds. Knowledge involves an essential
relation to a known object. _Accidents_ involve the essential relation of
an aptitude to inhere in _substances_. _Actio_ involves an essential
relation to an _agens_, and _passio_ to a _patiens_; matter to form and
form to matter. And so on. In general, wherever any subject has an
intrinsic and essential exigence or aptitude or inclination, whereby there
is established a connexion of this subject with, or a reference to,
something else, an ordination or “_ordo_” to something else, there we have
an “essential” relation.( ) Such a relation is termed “transcendental”
because it can be verified of a subject in any category; and, since it
adds nothing real to its subject it does not of itself constitute any new
category of real being. Like the logical relation it is referred to here
in order to bring out, by way of contrast, the accidental or predicamental
relation which is the proper subject-matter of the present chapter.

 . PREDICAMENTAL RELATIONS; THEIR FOUNDATIONS AND DIVISIONS.—An
accidental or predicamental relation is one which is _not essential to the
related subject, but superadded to, and separable from, the latter_. Such,
for instance, are relations of equality or inequality, similarity or
dissimilarity. It is not involved in the nature of the subject itself, but
is superinduced on the latter by reason of some real foundation really
distinct from the nature of this subject. Its sole function is to refer
the subject to the term, while the essential or transcendental relation is
rather an intrinsic attribute or aptitude of the nature itself as a
principle of action, or an effect of action. The real, accidental relation
is the one which Aristotle placed in a category apart as one of the
ultimate accidental modes of real being. Hence it is called a
“predicamental” relation. What are its principal sub-classes?

Real relations are divided according to the nature of their foundations.
But some relations are real _ex utraque parte_—mutual relations, while
others are real only on the side—mixed relations. Moreover, some real
relations are transcendental, others predicamental. Aristotle in assigning
three distinct grounds of predicamental relations seems to have included
some relations that are transcendental.( ) He distinguishes( ) (_a_)
relations grounded in unity and multitude; (_b_) relations grounded in
efficient causality; and (_c_) relations grounded in “commensuration”.

(_a_) By “unity and multitude” he is commonly interpreted to mean identity
or diversity not merely in _quantity_, but in any “formal” factor, and
therefore also in _quality_, and in _nature_ or _substance_. Things that
are one in quantity we term _equal_; one in quality, _similar_; one in
substance, _identical_. And if they are not one in these respects we call
them _unequal_, _dissimilar_, _distinct_ or _diverse_, respectively. About
quantity as a foundation for real, predicamental relations there can be no
difficulty. Indeed it is in a certain sense implied in all relations—at
least as apprehended by the human mind. For we apprehend relations, of
whatsoever kind, by mental comparison, and this involves the consciousness
of _number_ or _plurality_, of _two_ things compared.( ) And when we
compare things on the basis of any _quality_ we do so only by
distinguishing and measuring _intensive grades_ in this quality, after the
analogy of _extensive_ or _quantitative_ measurement ( ). Nevertheless
just as quality is a distinct accident irreducible to quantity ( ), so
are relations based on quality different from those based on quantity. But
what about substance or nature as a foundation of _predicamental_
relations? For these, as distinct from transcendental relations, some
accident really distinct from the substance seems to be required. The
substantial, individual _identity_ of any real being with itself is only a
logical relation, for there are not two really distinct extremes. The
specific identity of John with James in virtue of their common human
nature is a real relation but it would appear to be transcendental.( )
The relation of the real John and the real James to our knowledge of them
is the transcendental relation of any reality to knowledge, the relation
of ontological truth. This relation is _essentially_ actual in regard to
the Divine mind, but only potential, and _accidentally_ actual, in regard
to any created mind ( ). The relation of real distinction between two
individual substances is a real but _transcendental_ relation, grounded in
the transcendental attribute of _oneness_ which characterizes every real
being ( ,  ).

(_b_) Efficient causality, _actio et passio_, can undoubtedly be the
ground of real predicamental relations. If the action is transitive( )
the _patiens_ or recipient of the real change acquires by this latter the
basis of a relation of real dependence on the cause or _agens_. Again, if
the action provokes reaction, so that there is real interaction, each
_agens_ being also _patiens_, there arises a mutual predicamental relation
of interdependence between the two agencies. Furthermore, if the agent
itself is in any way really perfected by the action there arises a real
predicamental relation which is mutual: not merely a real relation of
effect to agent but also of agent to effect. This is true in all cases of
what scholastics call “univocal” as distinct from “equivocal” causation.
Of the former, in which the agent produces an effect _like in nature to
itself_, the propagation of their species by living things is the great
example. Here not only is the relation of offspring to parents a real
relation, but that of parents to offspring is also a real relation. And
this real relation is permanent because it is grounded not merely in the
transient generative processes but in some real and abiding result of
these processes—either some physical disposition in the parents
themselves,( ) or some _specific_ perfection attributed by extrinsic
denomination to the _individual_ parents: the parents are in a sense
continued in their offspring: “generation really perpetuates the species,
the specific nature, and in this sense may be said to perfect the
individual parents”.( ) In cases of “equivocal” causation—_i.e._ where
the effect is different in nature from the cause, as when a man builds a
house—the agent does not so clearly benefit by the action, so that in such
cases, while the relation of the effect to the cause is real, some authors
would regard that of the cause to the effect as logical.( ) When,
however, we remember that the efficient activity of all _created_ causes
is necessarily dependent on the Divine _Concursus_, and necessarily
involves _change in the created cause itself_, we can regard this change
as in all cases the ground of a real relation of the created cause to its
effect. But the creating and conserving activity of the Divine Being
cannot ground a real relation of the latter to creatures because the
Divine Being is Pure and Unchangeable Actuality, acquiring no new
perfection, and undergoing no real change, by such activity.( )

(_c_) By commensuration as a basis of real relations Aristotle does not
mean quantitative measurement, but the determination of the perfection of
one reality by its being essentially conformed to, and regulated by,
another: as the perfection of knowledge or science, for instance, is
determined by the perfection of its object. This sort of commensuration,
or essential ordination of one reality to another, is obviously the basis
of _transcendental_ relations. Some authors would consider that besides
the transcendental relation of science to its object, a relation which is
independent of the actual existence of the latter, there also exists an
accidental relation in science to its object as long as this latter is in
actual existence. But rather it should be said that just as the
transcendental truth-relation of any real object to intellect is
fundamental (potential) or formal (actual) according as this intellect
merely _can_ know this object or actually _does_ know it, so also the
transcendental relation of knowledge to its object is fundamental or
formal according as this object is merely possible or actually existing.

We gather from the foregoing analysis that the three main classes of
predicamental relations are those based on _quantity_, _quality_, and
_causality_, respectively.

 . IN WHAT DOES THE REALITY OF PREDICAMENTAL RELATIONS CONSIST?—We have
seen that not all relations are purely logical. There are real relations;
and of these some are not merely aspects of the other categories of real
being, not merely transcendental attributes virtually distinct from, but
really identical with, these other absolute modes of real being which we
designate as “substance,” “quantity,” “quality,” “cause,” “effect,” etc.
There are real relations which form a distinct accidental mode of real
being and so constitute a category apart. The fact, however, that these
predicamental relations have been placed by Aristotle and his followers in
a category apart does not of itself prove that the predicamental relation
is a special reality _sui generis_, really and adequately distinct from
the realities which constitute the other categories ( ). If the
predicamental relation be not a _purely logical entity_, if it be an _ens
rationis cum fundamento in re_, or, in other words, if the object of our
concept of “predicamental relation,” has a foundation in reality (_e.g._
like the concepts of “space” and “time”), then it may reasonably be placed
in a category apart, even although it may not be itself formally a
reality. We have therefore to see whether or not the predicamental
relation is, or embodies, any mode of real being adequately distinct from
these modes which constitute the other categories.

The predicamental relation is real in the sense that it implies, in
addition to two really distinct extremes, a real foundation in one or both
of these extremes, a real accident such as quantity, quality, or
causality. That is to say, considered in its foundation or cause,
considered fundamentally or _secundum suum esse in subjecto_, the
predicamental relation is real, inasmuch as its foundation is a reality
independently of the consideration of the mind. No doubt, if the
predicamental relation, adequately considered, implies no other reality
than that of its foundation and terms, then the predicamental relation
does not contain any special reality _sui generis_, distinct from
substances, quality, quantity, and other such absolute modes of real
being. This, however, does not prevent its ranking as a distinct category
provided it adds a virtually distinct and altogether peculiar aspect to
those absolute realities. Now, considered adequately, the predicamental
relation adds to the reality it has in its foundation the _actual
reference_ of subject to term. In fact, it is in this reference of subject
to term, this “_esse ad_,” that the relation _formally_ consists. The
question therefore may be stated thus: Is this formal relation of subject
to term, this “_esse ad_” a real entity _sui generis_, really distinct
from the absolute entities of subject, term and foundation, and in
contradistinction to these and all absolute entities a “relative entity,”
actually existing in the real universe independently of our thought? Or is
it, on the contrary, itself formally a mere product of our thought, a
product of the mental act of comparison, an _ens rationis_ an aspect
superadded by our minds to the extremes compared, and to the foundation in
virtue of which we compare them?

A good many scholastics, and some of them men of great name,( ) have
espoused the former alternative, considering that the reality of the
predicamental relation cannot be vindicated—against idealists, who would
reduce all relations to mere logical entities—otherwise than by according
to the relation considered _formally_, _i.e._ _secundum suum_ “_esse ad_,”
an entity in the actual order of things independent of our thought: adding
as an argument that if relation formally as such is anything at all, if
all relation be not a mere mental fabrication, it is essentially a
“relative” entity, and that manifestly a “relative” entity cannot be
really identical with any “absolute” entity. And they claim for this view
the authority of St Thomas.( )

The great majority of scholastics, however, espouse the second
alternative: that the relation, considered _formally_, “secundum _esse
ad_,” is a product of our mental comparison of subject with term. It is
not itself a real entity or a real mode, superadded to the reality of
extremes and foundation.

In the first place there is no need to suppose the reality of such a
relative entity. _Entia non sunt multiplicanda præter necessitatem._ It is
an abuse of realism to suppose that the _formal_ element of a relation,
its “_esse ad_,” is a distinct and separate reality. The reality of the
praedicamental relation is safeguarded without any such postulate. Since
the predicamental relation, considered _adequately_, _i.e._ not merely
formally but fundamentally, not merely _secundum esse ad_ but _secundum
esse in_, involves as its foundation an absolute accident which is real
independently of our thought, the predicamental relation is not a _mere
ens rationis_. It has a foundation in reality. It is an _ens rationis cum
fundamento in re_. This is a sufficient counter-assertion to Idealism, and
a sufficient reason for treating relation as a distinct category of real
being.

That there is no need for such a relative entity will be manifest if we
consider the simple case of two bars of iron each a yard long. The length
of each is an absolute accident of each. The length of either, considered
absolutely and in itself, is not formally the _equality_ of this with the
other. Nor are both lengths considered separately the formal relation of
equality. But both considered together are the adequate foundation of this
formal relation; both considered together are this relation _potentially_,
_fundamentally_, so that all that is needed for the _actual_, _formal_
relation of _equality_ is the mental apprehension of the two lengths
together. The mental process of comparison is the only thing required to
make the potential relation actual; and the product of this mental process
is the _formality_ or “_esse ad_” of the relation, the actual reference of
the extremes to each other. Besides the absolute accidents which
constitute the foundation of the relation something more is required for
the constitution of the adequate predicamental relation. This “something
more,” however, is a mind capable of comparing the extremes, and not any
real entity distinct from extremes and foundation. Antecedently to the act
of comparison the formally relative element of the relation, its “_esse
ad_,” was not anything actual; it was the mere _comparability_ of the
extremes in virtue of the foundation. If the “_esse ad_” were a separate
real entity, a relative entity, really distinct from extremes and
foundation, what sort of entity could it be? Being an accident, it should
inhere in, or be a mode of its subject. But if it did it would lose its
formally relative character by becoming an inherent mode of an absolute
reality. While to conceive it as an entity astride on both extremes, and
bridging or connecting these together, would be to substitute the crude
imagery of the imagination for intellectual thought.

In the second place, if a subject can acquire a relation, or lose a
relation, _without undergoing any real change_, then the relation
considered formally as such, or _secundum_ “_esse ad_,” cannot be a
reality. But a subject can acquire or lose a relation without undergoing
any real change. Therefore the relation considered formally, as distinct
from its foundation and extremes, is not a reality.

The minor of this argument may be proved by the consideration of a few
simple examples. A child already born is neither larger nor smaller than
its brother that will be born two years hence.( ) But after the birth of
the latter child the former can acquire those relations successively
_without any real change in itself_, and merely by the growth of the
younger child. Again, one white ball _A_ is similar in colour to another
white ball _B_. Paint the latter black, and _eo ipso_ the former loses its
relation of resemblance _without any real change in itself_.


    And this appears to be the view of St. Thomas. If, he writes,
    another man becomes equal in size to me by growing while I remain
    unchanged in size, then although _eo ipso_ I become equal in size
    to him, thus acquiring a new relation, _nevertheless I gain or
    acquire nothing new_: “nihil advenit mihi de novo, per hoc quod
    incipio esse alteri aequalis per ejus mutationem”. Relation, he
    says, is an extramental reality _by reason of its foundation or
    cause_, whereby one reality is referred to another.( ) Relation
    itself, considered formally as distinct from its foundation, is
    not a reality; it is real only inasmuch as its foundation is
    real.( ) Again, relation is something inherent, but not formally
    as a relation, and hence it can disappear without any real change
    in its subject.( ) A real relation may be destroyed in one or
    other of two ways: either by the destruction or change of the
    foundation in the subject, or by the destruction of the term,
    entailing the cessation of the reference, _without any change in
    the subject_.( ) Hence, too, the reason alleged by St. Thomas
    why relation, unlike the other categories of real being, can be
    itself divided into logical entity and real entity, _ens rationis_
    and _ens reale_: because formally it is an _ens rationis_, and
    only fundamentally, or in virtue of its foundation, is it an _ens
    reale_.( ) And hence, finally, the reason why St. Thomas,
    following Aristotle, describes relation as having a “lesser
    reality,” an “esse debilius,”( ) than the other or absolute
    categories of real being: not as if it were a sort of diminutive
    entity, intermediate between nothingness and the absolute modes of
    reality, but because being dependent for its formal actuality not
    merely on a foundation in its subject, but also on a term to which
    the latter is referred, it can perish not merely by the
    destruction of its subject like other accidents, but also by the
    destruction of its term while subject and foundation remain
    unchanged.


If, then, the real relation, considered formally or “secundum _esse ad_”
is not a reality, the relation under this aspect is a _logical_, not a
_real_, accident.

To constitute a mutual real relation there is needed a foundation in
_both_ of the extremes. As long as the term of the relation does not
actually exist, not only does the relation not exist formally and
actually, but it is not even _adequately potential_: the foundation in the
subject alone is not an adequate foundation.

To this view, which denies any distinct reality to the predicamental
relation considered formally, it has been objected that the predicamental
relation is thus confounded with the transcendental relation. But this is
not so; for the transcendental relation is always essential to its
subject, whatever this subject may be, while the predicamental relation,
considered formally, is a logical accident separable from its subject, and
considered fundamentally it is some absolute accident really distinct from
the substance of the related extremes. For instance, the _action_ which
mediates between cause and effect is itself transcendentally related to
both; while it is at the same time the adequate foundation whereby cause
and effect are predicamentally related to each other.( )

If what we have called the formal element of a relation be nothing really
distinct from the extremes and foundation, it follows that some real
relations between creatures are really identical with their
substances;( ) and to this it has been objected that no relation _in
creatures_ can be, _quoad rem_, substantial: “Nulla relatio,” says St.
Thomas,( ) “est substantia secundum rem in creaturis”. To this it may be
replied that even in these cases the relation itself, considered
adequately, is not wholly identical with the substance of either extreme.
It superadds a separable logical accident to these.( )

Finally it is objected that the view which denies a distinct reality to
the formal element of a real relation, to its “_esse ad_,” equivalently
denies all reality to relations, and is therefore in substance identical
with the idealist doctrine already rejected ( ). But this is a
misconception. According to idealists, relations grounded on quality,
quantity, causality, etc., are exclusively in the intellect, in our mental
activity and its mental products, in our concepts alone, and are in no
true sense characteristic of reality. This is very different from saying
that our concepts of such relations are grounded in the realities
compared, and that these realities are really endowed with everything that
constitutes such relations, the comparative act of the intellect being
required merely to apprehend these characteristics and so to give the
relation its formal completeness.( ) There is all the difference that
exists between a theory which so exaggerates the constitutive function of
thought as to reduce all intellectual knowledge to a knowledge of mere
subjective mental appearances, and a theory which, while recognizing this
function and its products, will not allow that these cast any cloud or
veil between the intellect and a genuine insight into objective reality.
These mental processes are guided by reality; the _entia rationis_ which
are their products are grounded in reality; moreover we can quite well
distinguish between these _mental_ modes and products of our intellectual
activity and the _real_ contents revealed to the mind in these modes and
processes. So long, therefore, as we avoid the mistake of ascribing to the
objective reality itself any of these mental modes (as, for instance,
extreme realists do when they assert the extramental reality of the
_formal_ universal), our recognition of them can in no way jeopardize the
objective validity of intellectual knowledge. Perhaps an excessive
timidity in this direction is in some degree accountable for the “abuse of
realism” which ascribes to the formal element of a relation a distinct
extramental,( ) objective reality.





CHAPTER XIII. CAUSALITY; CLASSIFICATION OF CAUSES.


 . TRADITIONAL CONCEPT OF CAUSE.—The modes of real being which we have
been so far examining—substance, quality, quantity, relation—are modes of
reality considered as _static_. But it was pointed out in an early chapter
(ch. ii.) that the universe of our experience is subject to change, that
it is ever _becoming_, that it is the scene of a continuous world-process
which is apparently regulated by more or less stable principles or laws,
these laws and processes constituting the _universal order_ which it is
the duty of the philosopher to study and explain. We must now return to
this _kinetic_ and _dynamic_ aspect of reality, and investigate the
principles of change in things by a study of _Causes_.

As with the names of the other ultimate categories, so too here, the
general sense of the term “cause” (_causa_, αἴτιον) is familiar to all,
while analysis reveals a great variety of modalities of this common
signification. We understand by a cause _anything which has a positive
influence of any sort on the being or happening of something else_. In
philosophy this is the meaning which has been attached traditionally to
the term since the days of Aristotle; though in its present-day scientific
use the term has almost lost this meaning, mainly through the influence of
modern phenomenism.( ) The traditional notion of cause is usually
expounded by comparing it with certain kindred notions: _principle_,
_condition_, _occasion_, _reason_.

A _principle_ is _that from which anything proceeds in any way
whatsoever_.( ) Any sort of intrinsic connexion between two objects of
thought is sufficient to constitute the one a “principle” of the other;
but a mere extrinsic or time sequence is not sufficient. A _logical_
principle is some _truth_ from which further truths are or may be derived.
A _real_ principle is some _reality_ from which the _being_ or _happening_
of something originates and proceeds.( ) If this procession involves a
real and positive influence of the principle on that which proceeds from
it, such a real principle is a cause. But there may be a real and
intrinsic connexion without any such influence. For instance, in the
substantial changes which occur in physical nature the generation of the
new substantial formative principle necessarily presupposes the
_privation_ of the one which antecedently “informed” the material
principle; but this “_privatio formae_” has no positive influence on the
generation of the new “form”; it is, however, the necessary and natural
antecedent to the generation of the latter; hence although this “_privatio
formae_” is a real principle of substantial change (the process or
_fieri_) it is not a _cause_ of the latter. The notion of principle, even
of real principle, is therefore wider than the notion of cause.( )

A _condition_, in the proper sense of a necessary condition or _conditio
sine qua non_, is something which must be realized or fulfilled before the
event or effect in question can happen or be produced. On the side of the
latter there is real dependence, but from the side of the former there is
no real and positive influence on the happening of the event. The
influence of the condition is negative; or, if positive, it is only
indirect, consisting in the removal of some obstacle—“_removens
probibens_”—to the positive influence of the cause. In this precisely a
condition differs from a cause: windows, for instance, are a condition for
the lighting of a room in the daylight, but the sun is the cause. The
distinction is clear and intelligible, nor may it be ignored in a
philosophical analysis of causality. At the same time it is easy to
understand that where, as in the inductive sciences, there is question of
discovering _all_ the antecedents, positive and negative, of any given
kind of phenomenon, in order to bring to light and formulate the law or
laws according to which such phenomenon occurs, the distinction between
cause and condition is of minor importance.( )

An _occasion_ is _any circumstance or combination of circumstances
favourable to the action of a free cause_. For instance, a forced sale is
an occasion for buying cheaply; night is an occasion of theft; bad
companionship is an occasion of sin. An occasion has no intrinsic
connexion with the effect as in the case of a principle, nor is it
necessary for the production of the effect as in the case of a condition.
It is spoken of only in connexion with the action of a free cause; and it
differs from a cause in having no positive and direct influence on the
production of the effect. It has, however, a real though indirect
influence on the production of the effect by soliciting and aiding the
determination of the free efficient cause to act. In so far as it does
exert such an influence it may be regarded as a partial efficient cause,
not a physical but a moral cause, of the effect.

To ask for the _reason_ of any event or phenomenon, or of the nature or
existence of any reality, is to demand an _explanation_ of the latter; it
is to seek what _accounts_ for the latter, what makes this _intelligible_
to our minds. Whatever is a cause is therefore also a reason, but the
latter notion is wider than the former. Whatever explains a _truth_ is a
_logical_ reason of the latter. But since all truths are concerned with
realities they must have ultimately _real_ reasons, _i.e._ explanatory
principles inherent in the realities themselves. The knowledge of these
real or ontological principles of things is the logical reason of our
understanding of the things themselves. But the ontological principles,
which are the real reasons of the things, are wider in extent than the
causes of these things, for they include principles that are not causes.

Furthermore, the grades of reality which we discover in things by the
activity of abstract thought, and whereby we compare, classify and define
those things, we apprehend as explanatory principles of the latter; and
these principles, though really in the things, and therefore real
“reasons,” are not “causes”.

Thus, life is a real reason, though not a cause, of sensibility in the
animal organism; the soul’s independence of matter in its mode of
existence is a real reason, though not a cause, of its spiritual
activities. Hence, between a reason and that which it accounts for there
may be only a logical distinction, while between a cause and that which it
causes there must be a real distinction ( ).

To understand all the intrinsic principles which constitute the _essence_
of anything is to know the _sufficient reason_ of its _reality_. To
understand all the extrinsic principles which account for its actual
_existence_ is to know the sufficient reason of its _existence_; and to
understand this latter adequately is to realize that the thing depends
ultimately for its actual existence on a Reality or Being which
necessarily exists by virtue of its own essence.


    What has been called the _Principle of Sufficient Reason_ asserts,
    when applied to reality, that every existing reality must have a
    sufficient reason for existing and for being what it is.( )
    Unlike the _Principle of Causality_ which is an axiomatic or
    self-evident truth, this principle is rather a necessary postulate
    of all knowledge, an assumption that _reality is intelligible_. It
    does not mean that all reality, or even any single finite reality,
    is adequately intelligible to our finite minds. In the words of
    Bossuet, we do not know everything about anything: “nous ne savons
    le tout de rien”.

    In regard to contingent _essences_, if these be composite we can
    find a sufficient reason why they are such in their constitutive
    principles; but in regard to simple essences, or to the simple
    constitutive principles of composite essences, we can find no
    sufficient reason why they are such in anything even logically
    distinct from themselves: they are what they are because they are
    what they are, and to demand why they are what they are, is, as
    Aristotle remarked, to ask an idle question. At the same time,
    when we have convinced ourselves that their actual existence
    involves the existence of a Supreme, Self-Existent, Intelligent
    Being, we can see that the essence of this Being is the ultimate
    ground of the intrinsic possibility of all finite essences ( ).

    In regard to contingent _existences_ the Principle of Sufficient
    Reason is coincident with the Principle of Causality, inasmuch as
    the sufficient reason of the actual existence of any contingent
    thing consists in the extrinsic real principles which are its
    causes. The existence of contingent things involves the existence
    of a Necessary Being. We may say that the sufficient reason for
    the existence of the Necessary Being is the Divine Essence Itself;
    but this is merely denying that there is outside this Being any
    sufficient reason, _i.e._ any cause of the latter’s existence; it
    is the recognition that the Principle of Causality is inapplicable
    to the Necessary Being. The Principle of Sufficient Reason, in
    this application of it, is logically posterior to the Principle of
    Causality.( )


 . CLASSIFICATION OF CAUSES: ARISTOTLE’S FOURFOLD DIVISION.—In modern
times many scientists and philosophers have thought it possible to explain
the order and course of nature, the whole cosmic process and the entire
universe of our experience, by an appeal to the operation of _efficient
causes_. Espousing a mechanical, as opposed to a teleological, conception
of the universe, they have denied or ignored all influence of _purpose_,
and eschewed all study of _final causes_. Furthermore, misconceiving or
neglecting the category of substance, and the doctrine of substantial
change, they find no place in their speculations for any consideration of
_formal_ and _material_ causes. Yet without final, formal and material
causes, so fully analysed by Aristotle( ) and the scholastics, no
satisfactory explanation of the world of our experience can possibly be
found. Let us therefore commence by outlining the traditional fourfold
division of causes.

We have seen already that change involves composition or compositeness in
the thing that is subject to change. Hence two _intrinsic_ principles
contribute to the constitution of such a thing, the one a passive,
determinable principle, its _material cause_, the other an active,
determining principle, its _formal cause_. Some changes in material things
are superficial, not reaching to the substance itself of the thing; these
are _accidental_, involving the union of some _accidental_ “form” with the
concrete pre-existing substance as material (_materia_ “_secunda_”).
Others are more profound, changes of the substance itself; these are
_substantial_, involving the union of a new _substantial_ “form” with the
primal material principal (_materia_ “_prima_”) of the substance
undergoing the change. But whether the change be substantial or accidental
we can always distinguish in the resulting composite thing two intrinsic
constitutive principles, its _formal cause_ and its _material cause_. The
agencies in nature which, by their activity, bring about change, are
_efficient causes_. Finally, since it is an undeniable fact that there is
_order_ in the universe, that its processes give evidence of _regularity_,
of operation according to _law_, that the cosmos reveals a _harmonious
co-ordination of manifold_ agencies and a _subordination of means to
ends_, it follows that there must be working in and through all nature a
directive principle, a principle of plan or design, a principle according
to which those manifold agencies work together in fulfilment of a purpose,
_for the attainment of ends_. Hence the reality of a fourth class of
causes, _final causes_.

The separate influence of each of those four kinds of cause can be clearly
illustrated by reference to the production of any work of art. When, for
instance, a sculptor chisels a statue from a block of marble, the latter
is the material cause (_materia secunda_) of the statue, the form which he
induces on it by his labour is the formal cause (_forma accidentalis_),
the sculptor himself as agent is the efficient cause, and the motive from
which he works—money fame, esthetic pleasure, etc.—is the final cause.

The formal and material causes are _intrinsic_ to the effect; they
constitute the effect _in facto esse_, the distinction of each from the
latter being an inadequate real distinction. It is not so usual nowadays
to call these intrinsic constitutive principles of things _causes_ of the
latter; but they verify the general definition of cause. The other two
causes, the efficient and the final, are _extrinsic_ to the effect, and
really and adequately distinct from it,( ) extrinsic principles of its
production, its _fieri_.

This classification of causes is adequate;( ) it answers all the
questions that can be asked in explanation of the production of any
effect: _a quo?_ _ex quo?_ _per quid?_ _propter quid?_ Nor is there any
sort of cause which cannot be brought under some one or other of those
four heads. What is called an “exemplar cause,” _causa exemplaris_, _i.e._
the ideal or model or plan in the mind of an intelligent agent, according
to which he aims and strives to execute his work, may be regarded as an
extrinsic formal cause; or again, in so far as it aids and equips the
agent for his task, an efficient cause; or, again, in so far as it
represents a good to be realized, a final cause.( )

The objects of our knowledge are in a true sense causes of our knowledge:
any such object may be regarded as an efficient cause, both physical and
moral, of this knowledge, in so far as by its action on our minds it
determines the activity of our cognitive faculties; or, again, as a final
cause, inasmuch as it is the end and aim of the knowledge.

The essence of the soul is, as we have seen ( ), not exactly an efficient
cause of the faculties which are its properties; but it is their final
cause, inasmuch as their _raison d’être_ is to perfect it; and their
subjective or material cause, inasmuch as it is the seat and support of
these faculties.

The fourfold division is analogical, not univocal: though the matter, the
form, the agent, and the end or purpose, all contribute positively to the
production of the effect, it is clear that the character of the causal
influence is widely different in each case.

Again, its members do not demand distinct subjects: all four classes of
cause may be verified in the same subject. For instance, the human soul is
a formal cause in regard to the composite human individual, a material
cause in regard to its habits, an efficient cause in regard to its acts,
and a final cause in regard to its faculties.

Furthermore, the fourfold division is not an immediate division, for it
follows the division of cause in general into _intrinsic_ and _extrinsic_
causes. Finally, it is a division of the causes which we find to be
operative _in_ the universe. But the philosophical study of the universe
will lead us gradually to the conviction that itself and all the causes in
it are themselves _contingent_, themselves caused by and dependent on, a
Cause _outside_ or extrinsic to the universe, a _First_, _Uncaused_,
_Uncreated_, _Self-Existent_, _Necessary Cause_ (_Causa Prima_,
_Increata_), at once the _efficient_ and _final_ cause of all things. In
contrast with this _Uncreated_, _First Cause_, all the other causes we
have now to investigate are called _created_ or _second_ causes (_causae
secundae_, _creatae_).

A cause may be either _total_, _adequate_, or _partial_, _inadequate_,
according as the effect is due to its influence solely, or to its
influence in conjunction with, or dependence on, the influence of some
other cause or causes _of the same order_. A created cause, therefore, is
a total cause if the effect is due to its influence independently of other
created causes; though of course all created causes are dependent, both as
to their existence and as to their causality, on the influence of the
First Cause. Without the activity of created efficient and final causes
the First Cause can accomplish directly whatever these can
accomplish—except their very causality itself, which cannot be actualized
without them, but for which He can supply _eminenter_. Similarly, while it
is incompatible with His Infinite Perfection that He discharge the
function of material or formal cause of finite composite things, He can
immediately create these latter by the simultaneous production (_ex
nihilo_) and union of their material and formal principles.

A cause is said to be _in actu secundo_ when it is actually exercising its
causal influence. Antecedently to such exercise, at least _prioritate
naturae_, it is said to be _in actu primo_: when it has the expedite power
to discharge its function as cause it is _in actu primo proximo_, while if
its power is in any way incomplete, hampered or unready, it is _in actu
primo remoto_.

Many other divisions of cause, subordinate to the Aristotelian division,
will be explained in connexion with the members of this latter.

 . MATERIAL AND FORMAL CAUSES.—These are properly subject-matter for
_Cosmology_. We will therefore very briefly supplement what has been said
already concerning them in connexion with the doctrine of _Change_ (ch.
ii.). By a material cause we mean _that out of which anything is made_:
_id ex quo aliquid fit_. Matter is correlative with form: from the union
of these there results a composite reality endowed with either essential
or accidental unity—with the former if the material principle be
absolutely indeterminate and the correlative form substantial, with the
latter if the material principle be some actually existing individual
reality and the form some supervening accident. Properly speaking only
corporeal substances have material causes,( ) but the term “material
cause” is used in an extended sense to signify any potential, passive,
receptive subject of formative or actuating principles: thus the soul is
the subjective or material cause of its faculties and habits; essence of
existence; _genus of differentia_, etc.

In what does the positive causal influence of a material cause consist?
How does it contribute positively to the actualization of the composite
reality of which it is the material cause? It _receives_ and _unites with_
the form which is educed from its potentiality by the action of efficient
causes, and thus contributes to the generation of the concrete, composite
individual reality.( )

It is by reason of the causality of the _formal cause_ that we speak of a
thing being _formally_ such or such. As correlative of material cause it
finds its proper application in reference to the constitution of corporeal
things. The formative principle, called _forma substantialis_, which
actuates, determines, specifies the material principle, and by union with
the latter constitutes an individual corporeal substance of a definite
kind, is the (substantial) formal cause of this composite substance.( )
The material principle of corporeal things is of itself indifferent to any
species of body; it is the form that removes this indefiniteness and
determines the matter, by its union with the latter, to constitute a
definite type of corporeal substance.( ) The existence of different
species of living organisms and different types of inorganic matter in the
universe implies in the constitution of these things a common material
principle, _materia prima_, and a multiplicity of differentiating,
specifying, formative principles, _formae substantiales_. That the
distinction between these two principles in the constitution of any
individual corporeal substance, whether living or inorganic, is not merely
a virtual distinction between metaphysical (generic and specific) grades
of being in the individual, but a real distinction between separable
entities, is a scholastic thesis established in the Special Metaphysics of
the organic and inorganic domains of the universe.( )

Since the _form_ is a perfecting, actuating principle, the term is often
used synonymously with _actus_, _actuality_. And since besides the
essential perfection which a being has by virtue of its substantial form
it may have accidental perfections by reason of supervening accidental
forms, these, too, are formal causes.

In what does the causal influence of the formal cause consist? In
communicating itself intrinsically to the material principle or passive
subject from whose potentiality it is evoked by the action of efficient
causes; in actuating that potentiality by intrinsic union therewith, and
thus determining the individual subject to be actually or formally an
individual of such or such a kind.

The material and formal causes are _intrinsic_ principles of the
constitution of things. We next pass to an analysis of the two _extrinsic_
causes, and firstly of the efficient cause and its causality.

 . EFFICIENT CAUSE; TRADITIONAL CONCEPT EXPLAINED.—By efficient cause we
understand that _by which_ anything takes place, happens, occurs: _id a
quo aliquid fit_. The world of our external and internal experience is the
scene of incessant _changes_: men and things not only are, but are
constantly _becoming_. Now every such change is originated by some active
principle, and this we call the efficient cause of the change. Aristotle
called it τὸ κινητικόν or ἡ ἀρχὴ κινητική, the _kinetic_ or _moving_
principle; or again, ἀρχὴ κινησέως ἢ μεταβολῆς ἐν ἑτέρω, _principium motus
vel mutationis in alio_, “the principle of motion or change in some other
thing”. The result achieved by this change, the actualized potentiality,
is called the _effect_; the causality itself of the efficient cause is
called _action_ (ποίησις), _motion_, _change_—and, from the point of view
of the effect, _passio_ (παθήσις). The perfection or endowment whereby an
efficient cause acts, _i.e._ its efficiency (ἐνέργεια), is called _active
power_ (_potentia seu virtus activa_); it is also called _force_ or
_potential energy_ in reference to inanimate agents, _faculty_ in
reference to animate agents, especially men and animals. This active power
of an efficient cause or agent is to be carefully distinguished from the
_passive potentiality_ acted upon and undergoing change. The former
connotes a perfection, the latter an imperfection: _unumquodque agit
inquantum est in actu, patitur vero inquantum, est in potentia_. The scope
of the active power of a cause is the measure of its actuality, of its
perfection in the scale of reality; while the extent of the passive
potentiality of _patiens_ is a measure of its relative imperfection. The
actuation of the former is _actio_, that of the latter _passio_. The point
of ontological connexion of the two _potentiae_ is the _change_ (_motus_,
κίνησις), this being at once the formal perfecting of the passive
potentiality in the _patiens_ or effect, and the immediate term of the
efficiency or active power of the _agens_ or cause. _Actio_ and _passio_,
therefore, are not expressions of one and the same concept; they express
two distinct concepts of one and the same reality, _viz._ the change:
_actio et passio sunt idem numero motus_. This change takes place
_formally_ in the subject upon which the efficient cause acts, for it is
an actuation of the potentiality of the former under the influence of the
latter: ἡ κίνησις ἐν τῷ κινητῷ; ἐντελέχεια γὰρ ἐστι τόυτου. Considered in
the potentiality of this subject—“τὸ τοῦδέ ἐν τῷδε: _hujus in hococ_”—it
is called _passio_. Considered as a term of the active power of the
cause—“τοῦδε ὑπο τοῦδε: _hujus per hoc_”—it is called _actio_.

The fact that _actio_ and _passio_ are really and objectively one and the
same _motus_ does not militate against their being regarded as two
separate supreme categories, for they are objects of distinct
concepts,( ) and this is sufficient to constitute them distinct
categories ( ).

Doubts are sometimes raised, as St. Thomas remarks,( ) about the
assertion that the action of an agent is not formally in the latter but in
the _patiens_: _actio fit in passo_. It is clear, however, he continues,
that the action is formally in the _patiens_ for it is the actuation not
of any potentiality of the agent, but of the passive potentiality of the
_patiens_: it is in the latter that the _motus_ or change, which is both
_actio_ and _passio_, takes place, dependently of course on the influence
of the agent, or efficient cause of the change. The active power of an
efficient cause is an index of the latter’s actuality; the exercise of
this power (_i.e._ _action_) does not formally perfect the agent, for it
is not an actuation of any passive potentiality of the latter; it formally
perfects the _patiens_. Only _immanent_ action perfects the agent, and
then not as agent but as _patiens_ or receiver of the actuality effected
by the action (_cf._   _infra_).

We may, then, define efficient cause as _the extrinsic principle of the
change or production of anything by means of action_: _principium
extrinsicum a quo fluit motus vel productio rei mediante actione_.

It is a “first” principle as compared with material and formal causes for
its influence is obviously prior in nature to theirs; also as compared
with the other extrinsic cause, the final cause, _in ordine executionis_,
not, however, _in ordine intentionis_. The “end,” not as realized but as
realizable, not in execution but in intention, discharges its function and
exerts its influence as “final _cause_” and in this order the final cause,
as will appear later, is _the first of all causes_: _finis est ultimus in
executione sed primus in intentione_.

“Change or production,” in the definition, is to be understood not in the
strict sense in which it presupposes an existing subject or material, but
in the wide sense in which it includes any production of new reality, even
creation or production _ex nihilo_.

“Action,” too, is to be understood in the wide sense in which it includes
the action of the First Cause, which action is really identical with the
essence of the latter. We conceive creation after the analogy of the
efficient action of created or “second” causes: we have no _proper_
concept of the infinite perfection of the Divine activity. In all created
efficient causes not only is the action itself, but also the efficiency,
force, power, faculty, which is its _proximate_ principle, really distinct
from the nature or essence of the agent; the former is a substance, the
latter an accident.

Finally, the action of a created efficient cause is either transitive
(_transiens_) or immanent (_immanens_) according as the change wrought by
the action takes place in something else (as when _the sun_ heats or
lights _the earth_) or in the cause itself (as when a man reasons or
wills). In the former case the action perfects not the agent but the other
thing, the _patiens_; in the latter case it perfects the agent itself,
_agens_ and _patiens_ being here the same identical concrete
individual.( )

 . SOME SCHOLIA ON CAUSATION. THE PRINCIPLE OF CAUSALITY.—Before
enumerating the principal kinds of efficient cause, and analysing the
nature of efficient causality, we may set down here certain self-evident
axioms and aphorisms concerning causation in general. (_a_) The most
important of these is the _Principle of Causality_, which has been
enunciated in a variety of ways: _Whatever happens has a cause_; _Whatever
begins to be has a cause_; _Whatever is contingent has a cause_; _Nothing
occurs without a cause_. Not everything that begins to be has necessarily
a _material_ cause, or a _formal_ cause, really distinct from itself. For
instance, simple spiritual beings, like the human soul, have no material
cause, nor any formal cause or constitutive principle distinct from their
essence. Similarly, the whole universe, having been created _ex nihilo_,
had no pre-existing material cause. All the material beings, however,
which are produced, generated, brought into actual existence in the course
of the incessant changes which characterize the physical universe, have
both material and formal causes. But the Principle of Causality refers
mainly to extrinsic causes. It is commonly understood only of efficient
causes; and only in regard to these is it self-evident. We shall see that
as a matter of fact nothing happens without a _final_ cause: that
intelligent purpose pervades reality through and through. This, however,
is a conclusion, not a principle. What is really a self-evident,
axiomatic, necessary principle is that _whatever happens has an_ EFFICIENT
_cause_. Only the Necessary, Self-Existing, Eternal Being, has the
sufficient reason of His actual existence in Himself, in His own essence.
That any being which is contingent could exist _independently of some
other actual being_ as the cause of this existence; that it could have
come into existence or begun to exist _from absolute nothingness, or be
produced or brought into actual existence without any actual being to
produce it_; or that, once existing and subject to change, it could
undergo change and have its potentialities actualized _without any actual
being to cause such change_ ( )—all this is positively unthinkable and
absolutely repugnant to our intelligence; all this our reason peremptorily
declares to be intrinsically impossible. Nor is there question of a mere
psychological inconceivability, such as might be due to a long-continued
custom of associating the idea of a “beginning” with the idea of a “cause”
of this beginning—as phenomenists generally contend.( ) There is
question of an impossibility which our reason categorically dictates to be
a real, ontological impossibility. The Principle of Causality is therefore
a necessary, _a priori_, self-evident principle.

(_b_) _Every effect must have an adequate efficient cause_, _i.e._ a cause
sufficiently perfect, sufficiently high on the scale of being, to have the
active power to produce the effect in question; otherwise the effect would
be partially uncaused, which is impossible.

(_c_) _An effect cannot as such be actually more perfect than its adequate
(created) cause_. The reason is that the effect as such is really
dependent for its actuality on its adequate created cause. It derives its
actuality from the latter. Now it is inconceivable that an agent could be
the active, productive principle of a greater perfection, a higher grade
of actuality, than itself possesses. Whatever be the nature of efficient
causality, _actio_ and _passio_ ( ), or of the dependence of the
produced actuality upon the active power of its adequate efficient cause
( ), the reality of this dependence forbids us to think that in the
natural order of efficient causation a higher grade of reality can be
actualized than the agent is capable of actualizing, or that the agent can
naturally actualize a higher or more perfect grade of reality than is
actually its own. We must, however, bear in mind that there is question of
the _adequate_ created cause of an effect; and that to account _fully_ for
the actualization of any potential reality whatsoever we are forced to
recognize in all causation of created efficient causes the _concursus_ of
the _First Cause_.

(_d_) The actuality of the effect is in its adequate created cause or
causes, _not actually and formally, but potentially_ or _virtually_. If
the cause produce an effect of the same kind as itself (_causa
____univoca___), as when living organisms propagate their species, the
perfection of the effect is said to be in the cause _equivalently_
(_aequivalenter_); if it produce an effect of a different kind from itself
(_causa ____analoga___), as when a sculptor makes a statue, the perfection
of the effect is said to be in the cause _eminently_ (_eminenter_).

(_e_) _Omne agens agit inquantum est in actu._ The operative power of a
being is in proportion to its own actual perfection: the higher an agent
is on the scale of reality, or in other words the more perfect its grade
of being, the higher and more perfect will be the effects achieved by the
exercise of its operative powers. In fact our chief test of the perfection
of any nature is analysis of its operations. Hence the maxim so often
referred to already:—

(_f_) _Operari sequitur esse; qualis est operatio talis est natura; modus
operandi sequitur modum essendi._ Operation is the key to nature; we know
what any thing is by what it does.

(_g_) _Nihil agit ultra suam speciem_; or, again, _Omne agens agit simile
sibi_. These are inductive generalizations gathered from experience, and
have reference to the natural operation of agents, especially in the
organic world. Living organisms reproduce only their own kind. Moreover,
every agency in the universe has operative powers of a definite kind;
acting according to its nature it produces certain effects and these only;
others it cannot produce: this is, in the natural order of things, and
with the natural _concursus_ of the First Cause. But created causes have a
passive _obediential capacity_ (_potentia obedientialis_) whereby their
nature can be so elevated by the First Cause that they can produce, with
His special, supernatural _concursus_, effects of an entirely higher order
than those within the ambit of their natural powers.( )

(_h_) From a known effect, of whatsoever kind, we can argue with
certainty, _a posteriori_, to the _existence_ of an adequate efficient
cause, and to _some knowledge_ of the _nature_ of such a cause.( ) By
virtue of the principle of causality we can infer the existence of an
adequate cause containing either equivalently or eminently all the
perfections of the effect in question.

 . CLASSIFICATION OF EFFICIENT CAUSES.—(_a_) We have already referred to
the distinction between the _First_ Cause and _Second_ or _Created_
Causes. The former is absolutely independent of all other beings both as
to His power and as to the exercise of this power. The latter are
dependent, for both, upon the former.

The distinction between a first, or primary, or independent cause, and
second, or subordinate, or dependent causes can be understood not only of
causes universally, but also as obtaining among created causes themselves.
In general the _subordination_ of a cause to a superior or anterior cause
may be either _essential_ or _accidental_: essential, when the second
cause depends—either for its existence or for an indispensable complement
of its efficiency—on the _present_ actual influence of the other cause;
accidental when the second cause has indeed received its existence or
efficiency from this other cause, but is now no longer dependent, for its
existence or action, on the latter. Thus, living organisms are, as causes,
accidentally subordinate to their parent organisms: they derived their
existence from the latter, but are independent of these when in their
maturity they continue to exist, and live, and act of themselves and for
themselves. But all creatures, on the other hand, are, as causes,
_essentially_ subordinate to the Creator, inasmuch as they can exist and
act only in constant dependence on the ever present and ever actual
conserving and concurring influence of the Creator.

It is obvious that all the members of any series of causes _essentially_
subordinate the one to the other _must exist simultaneously_. Whether such
a series could be infinite depends, therefore, on the question whether an
_actually infinite multitude_ is intrinsically possible. This difficulty
cannot be urged with such force against an infinite regress in causes
_accidentally_ subordinate to one another; for here such a regress would
not involve an actually infinite multitude of things existing
simultaneously. In the case of essentially subordinate causes, moreover,
the series, whatever about its infinity, must contain, or rather imply
_above_ it, _one_ cause which is _first_ in the sense of being
_independent_, or exempt from the subordination characteristic of all the
others. And the reason is obvious: Since no one of them can exist or act
except dependently on another, and this on another, and so on, it is
manifest that the series cannot exist at all unless there is some one
cause which, unlike all the others, exists and acts without such
subordination or dependence. Hence, _in essentially subordinate causes an
infinite regress is impossible_.( ) In Natural Theology these
considerations are of supreme importance.

(_b_) An efficient cause may be described as _immanent_ or _transitive_
according as the term of its action remains within the cause itself, or is
produced in something else. The action of the First Cause is formally
immanent, being identical with the Divine Nature itself; it is virtually
transitive when it is creative, or operative among creatures.

(_c_) An efficient cause is either a _principal_ or an _instrumental_
cause. When two causes so combine to produce an effect that one of them
uses the other the former is called the principal and the latter the
instrumental cause. Thus I am the principal cause of the words I am
writing; my pen is the instrumental cause of them. Such an effect is
always attributed to the principal cause, not to the instrumental. The
notion of an instrument is quite a familiar notion. An instrument helps
the principal agent to do what the latter could not otherwise do, or at
least not so easily. An instrument therefore is really a cause. It
contributes positively to the production of the effect. How does it do so?
By reason of its nature or structure it influences, modifies, and directs
in a particular way, the efficiency of the principal cause. But this
property of the instrumental cause comes into play only when the latter is
being actually used by a principal cause. A pen, a saw, a hammer, a spade,
have each its own instrumentality. The pen will not cut, nor the saw mould
iron, nor the hammer dig, nor the spade write, for the agent that uses
them. Each will produce its own kind of effect when used; but none of them
will produce any effect except when used: though each has in itself
permanently and inherently the power to produce its own proper effect in
use.( ) We have instanced the use of _artificial_ instruments. But
nature itself provides some agencies with what may be called _natural_
instruments. The _semen_ whereby living organisms propagate their kind is
an instance. In a less proper sense the various members of the body are
called instruments of the human person as principal cause, “instrumenta
_conjuncta_”.

The notion of an instrumental cause involves then (_a_) subordination of
the latter, in its instrumental activity, to a principal cause, (_b_)
incapacity to produce the effect otherwise than by modifying and directing
the influence of the principal cause. This property whereby the
instrumental cause modifies or determines in a particular way the
influence of the principal cause, is called by St. Thomas an _actio_ or
_operatio_ of the former; the distinction between the principal and the
instrumental cause being that whereas the former acts by virtue of a power
permanently inherent in it as a natural perfection, the latter acts as an
instrument only by virtue of the transient motion which it derives from
the principal cause which utilizes it.( )

We may, therefore, define an _instrumental_ cause as _one which, when
acting as an instrument, produces the effect not by virtue of its inherent
power alone, but by virtue of a power communicated to it by some principal
cause which acts through it_. A _principal_ cause, on the other hand, is
_one which produces its effect by virtue of an active power permanently
inherent in itself_.

The designations _principal_ and _instrumental_ are obviously correlative.
Moreover, _all created_ causes may be called _instrumental_ in relation to
the _First Cause_. For, not only are they dependent on the latter for the
_conservation_ of their nature and active powers; they are also dependent,
in their action, in their actual exercise of these powers, on the First
Cause (for the _concursus_ of the latter).( ) Yet some created causes
have these powers permanently, and can exercise them without subordination
to other creatures; while others need, for the exercise of their proper
functions, not only the Divine _concursus_, but also the motion of other
creatures. Hence the former are rightly called _principal_ created causes,
and the latter _instrumental_ created causes.

(_d_) Efficient causes are divided into _free_ causes and _necessary_
causes. A free or self-determining cause is _one which is not determined
by its nature to one line of action_, but _has the power of choosing, or
determining itself_, to act or abstain, when all the conditions requisite
for acting are present. Man is a free agent, or free cause, of his
deliberate actions. A necessary cause, or natural cause as it is sometimes
called, is _one which is determined by its nature to one invariable line
of action_, so that, granted the conditions requisite for action, it
cannot naturally abstain from acting in that invariable manner. All the
physical agencies of the inorganic world, all plant and animal organisms
beneath man himself, are necessary causes.

The freedom of the human will is established against determinism in
Psychology.( ) The difficulties of determinists against this doctrine
are for the most part based on misconceptions, or on erroneous and
gratuitous assumptions. We may mention two of them here.( ) Free
activity, they say, would be _causeless_ activity: it would violate the
“law of universal causation”. We reply that free activity is by no means
causeless activity. The free agent himself is in the fullest and truest
sense the efficient cause of his free acts. It is by his causal, efficient
influence that the act of free choice is determined and elicited. Free
causality evidently does not violate the necessary, _a priori_ principle
set forth above under the title of the Principle of Causality. But—they
urge in the second place—it violates the “law of universal causation,”
_i.e._ the law that every event in nature must be the result of some set
of phenomenal antecedents which _necessitate_ it, and which, therefore,
whenever verified, _must_ produce this result and no other; and by
violating this law it removes all supposed “free” activities from the
domain of that regularity and uniformity without which no scientific
knowledge of such phenomena would be possible. To this we reply, firstly,
that the law of uniform causation in nature, the law which is known as the
“Law of the Uniformity of Nature,” and which, under the title of the “Law
of Universal Causation” is confounded by determinists and phenomenists
with the entirely distinct “Principle of Causality”—is not by any means a
law of _necessary_ causation.( ) The statement that Nature is uniform in
its activities is not the expression of an _a priori_, necessary truth,
like the Principle of Causality. It is a generalization from experience.
And experience testifies to the existence of grades in this all-prevailing
uniformity. In the domain of physical nature it is the expression of the
Free Will of the Author of Nature, who may miraculously derogate from this
physical uniformity for higher, moral ends. In the domain of deliberate
human activities it is the expression of that less rigorous but no less
real uniformity which is dependent on the free will of man. And just as
the possibility of miracles in the former domain does not destroy the
regularity on which the generalizations of the physical sciences are
based, so neither does the fact of human free will render worthless or
unreliable the generalizations of the human sciences (ethical, social,
political, economic, etc.) about human conduct. Were the appearance of
miracles in the physical domain, or the ordinary play of free will in the
human domain, entirely _capricious_, _motiveless_, _purposeless_, the
results would, of course, be chaotic, precarious, unaccountable,
unintelligible, and scientific knowledge of them would be impossible: for
the assumption that reality is the work of intelligent purpose, and is
therefore a regular, orderly expression of law, in other words, the
assumption that the universe is intelligible, is a prerequisite condition
for scientific knowledge about the universe. But determinists seem to
assume that Divine Providence and human free will must necessarily imply
that the whole universe of physical phenomena and human activities would
be an unintelligible chaos; and having erected this philosophical
scarecrow on a gratuitous assumption they think it will gradually exorcise
all belief in Divine Providence and human freedom from the “scientific”
mind!

(_e_) Efficient causes are either _physical_ or _moral_. A physical
efficient cause is _one which produces its effect by its own proper power
and action_—whether immediately or by means of an instrument. For
instance, the billiard player is the physical cause of the motion he
imparts to the balls by means of the cue. A moral cause is one which
produces its effect by the representation of something as good or evil to
the mind of a free agent; by inducing the latter through example, advice,
persuasion, promises, threats, commands, entreaties, etc., to produce the
effect in question. For instance, a master is the moral cause of what his
servant does in obedience to his commands. The motives set forth by way of
inducement to the latter are of course _final_ causes of the latter’s
action. But the former, by setting them forth, is the moral cause of the
action: he is undoubtedly more than a mere condition; he contributes
positively and efficiently to the effect. His physical causation, however,
does not reach to the effect itself, but only to the effect wrought in the
mind of the servant by his command. It is causally connected with the
physical action of the servant by means of an intermediate link which we
may call _mental_ or _psychical causation_—_actio_ “_intentionalis_,”—the
action of cognition on the mind of a cognitive agent.

The agent employed by a moral cause to produce an effect physically may be
called an instrumental cause in a wide and less proper sense of this term,
the instrumentality being moral, not physical. Only free agents can be
moral causes; and as a rule they are termed moral causes only when they
produce the effect through the physical operation of another free agent.
What if they employ not free agents, nor yet inanimate instruments, but
agents endowed with sense cognition and sense appetite, to produce
effects? If a man set his dog at another, is he the _moral_ or the
_physical_ cause of the injuries inflicted by the dog? That he is the
principal _efficient_ cause is unquestionable. But is he the principal
_physical_ cause and the dog the _instrument_? We think it is more proper
to call the principal efficient cause a _moral_ cause in all cases where
there intervenes between his physical action and the effect an
intermediate link of “psychical” or “intentional” action, even though, as
in the present example, this psychical link is of the sentient, not the
intellectual, order.

(_f_) The efficient cause, like other causes, may be either _partial_ or
_total_, according as it produces the effect by co-operation with other
causes, or by itself alone. The aim of the inductive sciences is to
discover for each kind of natural event or phenomenon the “total cause” in
the comprehensive sense of the whole group of _positive_ agencies or
causes proper, and _negative_ antecedent and concomitant _conditions_
which are _indispensable_ and _necessitating_ principles of the happening
of such kind of event.( )

(_g_) We can distinguish between the _immediate or determining_, the more
or less _proximate_, and the more or less _remote_, efficient causes of an
event. Thus, the application of the fuse to the charge of dynamite in a
rock is the immediate or determining cause of the explosion which bursts
the rock; the lighting of the fuse, the placing of the charge, etc., the
more proximate causes; the making of the fuse, dynamite, instruments,
etc., the more remote causes. Again the aim of the inductive sciences is
to discover the “total _proximate_ cause” of events,( ) leaving the
investigation of ultimate causes, as well as the analysis of causality
itself, to philosophy.

(_h_) Finally, we must distinguish between the _individual_ agent itself
as cause (the _suppositum_ or person that acts); the agent’s _nature_ and
_active power_ as causes; and the _action_, or exercise of this power as
cause. The former, the individual, concrete agent, is the “principium
_quod_ agit,” and is called the “causa _ut quae_”. The nature and the
active power of the agent are each a “principium _quo_ agens agit,” the
remote and the proximate principle of action respectively; and each is
called a “causa _ut qua_”. The action of the agent is the cause of the
effect in the sense that the actual production or _fieri_ of anything is
the immediate cause of this thing _in facto esse_. Corresponding to these
distinctions we distinguish between the cause _in actu primo remoto_, _in
actu primo proximo_, and _in actu secundo_. These distinctions are of no
little importance. By ignoring them, and by losing sight of the intrinsic
(formal and material) causes of natural phenomena, many modern scientists
and philosophers have confounded cause and effect with the process itself
of causation, and declared that cause and effect are not distinct
realities, but only two mental aspects of one and the same reality.( )


    The same may be said of all the distinctions so far enumerated.
    They are absolutely essential to the formation of clear ideas on
    the question of causality. No term in familiar use is of more
    profound philosophical significance, and at the same time more
    elastic and ambiguous in its popular meanings, than the term
    _cause_. This is keenly felt in the Logic of the Inductive
    Sciences, where not only the discovery, but the exact measurement,
    of physical causes, is the goal of research.

    “When we call one thing,” writes Mr. Joseph,( ) “the cause of
    another, the real relation between them is not always the same....
    We say that molecular action is the cause of heat, that the heat
    of the sun is the cause of growth, that starvation is sometimes
    the cause of death, that jealousy is a frequent cause of crime. We
    should in the first case maintain that cause and effect are
    reciprocally necessary; no heat without molecular motion and no
    molecular motion without heat. In the second the effect cannot
    exist without the cause, but the cause may exist without the
    effect, for the sun shines on the moon but nothing grows there. In
    the third the cause cannot exist without the effect, for
    starvation must produce death, but the effect may exist without
    the cause, since death need not have been produced by starvation.
    In the fourth case we can have the cause without the effect, and
    also the effect without the cause; for jealousy may exist without
    producing crime, and crime may occur without the motive of
    jealousy. It is plain then that we do not always mean the same
    thing by our words when we say that two things are related as
    cause and effect; and anyone who would classify and name the
    various modes in which two things may be causally related would do
    a great service to clear thinking.”

    In the popular acceptation of the term _cause_, the same kind of
    event can have a _plurality of (efficient) causes_. Death, for
    example, may be brought about in different cases by different
    diseases or accidents. But if we understand by the total efficient
    cause of any given kind of effect the sum-total of agencies and
    conditions which when present _necessitate_ this kind of an
    effect, and which are collectively and severally _indispensable_
    for its production, then it is obvious that a given _kind_ of
    effect can have _only one kind_ of such total group of antecedents
    as total cause, just as any one individual effect can have only
    one individual total cause, _viz._ the one which actually produced
    it; a _similar_ total cause would produce a _similar_ effect, but
    could not produce the numerically identical individual effect of
    the other similar cause.( )

    The medieval scholastics discussed the question in connexion with
    the problem of individuation: “Would Alexander the Great have been
    the same individual had he been born of other parents than Philip
    and Olympia?” The question is hardly intelligible. The person born
    of these other parents might indeed have been as similar as you
    will to the actual Alexander of history, but would not and could
    not have been the actual Alexander of history. Nowadays the
    question discussed in this connexion is not so much whether the
    same kind of natural phenomenon can be produced by different kinds
    of total cause—for the answer to this question depends wholly on
    the wider or the narrower meaning attached to the term “total
    cause,”( )—but rather whether or how far the inductive
    scientist’s ideal of searching always for the _necessitating and
    indispensable_ cause (or, as it is also called, the
    “reciprocating” or “commensurate” cause) is a practical ideal.





CHAPTER XIV. EFFICIENT CAUSALITY; PHENOMENISM AND OCCASIONALISM.


 . OBJECTIVE VALIDITY OF THE TRADITIONAL CONCEPT OF EFFICIENT
CAUSALITY.—We have seen how modern sensists, phenomenists, and positivists
have doubted or denied the power of the human mind to attain to a
knowledge of any objective reality corresponding to the category of
substance (§§   _sqq._). They treat in a similar way the traditional
concept of efficient causality. And in delivering their open or veiled
attacks on the real validity of this notion they have made a misleading
use of the proper and legitimate function of the inductive sciences. The
chief aim of the natural scientist is to seek out and bring to light the
_whole group of necessitating and indispensable_ (phenomenal)
_antecedents_ of any given kind of event, and to formulate the natural law
of their connexion with this kind of event. There is no particular
objection to his calling these antecedents the _invariable_, or even the
_necessary_ or _necessitating_, antecedents of the event; provided he does
not claim what he cannot prove—and what, as we shall see later ( ), is
not true, _viz._—that the invariability or necessity of this connexion
between phenomenal antecedents and consequents is wholly inviolable,
fatal, absolute in character. He may rightly claim for any such
established connexion the hypothetical, conditional necessity which
characterizes all inductively established laws of physical nature. There
are such antecedents and consequents in the universe; there are connexions
between them which are more than mere _casual_ connexions of _time
sequence_, which are connexions of physical law, inasmuch as they are
connexions based on the _natures_ of agencies in an _orderly_ universe,
connexions of these agencies with their natural effects. All this is
undeniable. Moreover, so long as _the scientist_ confines himself to
inferences concerning such connexions between phenomena, to inferences and
generalizations based on the assumed uniformity of nature, he is working
in his proper sphere. Nay, even if he chooses to designate these groups of
invariable phenomenal antecedents by the title of “physical causes” we
know what he means; though we perceive some danger of confusion, inasmuch
as we see him arrogating to the notion of regularity or uniformity of
connexion _i.e._ to the notion of _physical law_, a term, _causality_,
which traditionally expressed something quite distinct from this, _viz._
the notion of _positive influence_ of one thing on the being or happening
of another. But when _phenomenist philosophers_ adopt this usage we cannot
feel reassured against the danger of confusion by such protestations as
those of Mill in the following passage:—( )


    I premise, then, that when in the course of this inquiry I speak
    of the cause of any phenomenon, I do not mean a cause which is not
    itself a phenomenon; I make no research into the ultimate or
    ontological cause of anything. To adopt a distinction familiar in
    the writings of the Scotch metaphysicians, and especially of Reid,
    the causes with which I concern myself are not _efficient_, but
    _physical_ causes. They are causes in that sense alone, in which
    one physical fact is said to be the cause of another. Of the
    efficient causes of phenomena, or whether any such causes exist at
    all I am not called upon to give an opinion. The notion of
    causation is deemed, by the schools of metaphysics most in vogue
    at the present moment, to imply a mysterious and most powerful
    tie, such as cannot, or at least does not, exist between any
    physical fact and that other physical fact on which it is
    invariably consequent, and which is popularly termed its cause;
    and thence is deduced the supposed necessity of ascending higher,
    into the essences and inherent constitution of things, to find the
    true cause, the cause which is not only followed by, but actually
    produces, the effect. No such necessity exists for the purposes of
    the present inquiry, nor will any such doctrine be found in the
    following pages. The only notion of a cause, which the theory of
    induction requires, is such a notion as can be gained by
    experience. The Law of Causation, which is the main pillar of
    inductive science, is but the familiar truth, that invariability
    of succession is found by observation to obtain between every fact
    in nature and some other fact which has preceded it; independently
    of all considerations respecting the ultimate mode of production
    of phenomena, and of every other question regarding the nature of
    “Things in themselves”.


This passage—which expresses fairly well the phenomenist and positivist
attitude in regard to the reality, or at least the cognoscibility, of
_efficient_ causes—fairly bristles with inaccuracies, misconceptions, and
false insinuations.( ) But we are concerned here only with the denial
that any notion of an _efficient_ cause “can be gained from experience,”
and the doubt consequently cast on the objective validity of this notion.
The Sensism which regards our highest intellectual activities as mere
organic associations of sentient states of consciousness, has for its
logical issue the Positivism which contends that all valid knowledge is
confined to the existence and time and space relations of sense phenomena.
In thus denying to the mind all power of attaining to a valid knowledge of
anything suprasensible—such as substance, power, force, efficient cause,
etc.—Positivism passes over into Agnosticism.

In refutation of this philosophy, in so far as it denies that we have any
grounds in experience for believing in the real existence of efficient
causes, we may set down in the first place this universal belief itself of
the human race that there are in the universe efficient causes of the
events that happen in it. Men universally believe that they themselves as
agents contribute by a real and positive influence to the actual
occurrence of their own thoughts, reasonings, wishes, desires, sensations;
that their mental resolves to speak, walk, write, eat, or perform any
other external, bodily works do really, positively, and efficiently
produce or cause those works; that external phenomena have a real
influence on happenings in their own bodies, that fire burns them and food
nourishes them; that external phenomena also have a real and positive
influence on their sense organs, and through these on their minds by the
production there of conscious states such as sensations; finally that
external phenomena have a real and positive influence on one another; that
by action and interaction they really produce the changes that are
constantly taking place in the universe: that the sun does really heat and
light the earth, that the sowing of the seed in springtime has really a
positive influence on the existence of crops in the harvest, that the
taking of poison has undoubtedly a real influence on the death which
results from it. And if any man of ordinary intelligence and plain common
sense is told that such belief is an illusion, that in all such cases the
connexion between the things, facts or events which he designates as
“cause” and “effect,” is a mere connexion of invariable time sequence
between antecedents and consequents, that in no case is there evidence of
any _positive, productive influence_ of the one fact upon the other, he
will either smile incredulously and decline to take his objector
seriously, or he will simply ask the latter to _prove_ the universal
belief to be an illusion. His conviction of the real and objective
validity of his notion of efficient cause, as something which positively
influences the happening of things, is so profound and ineradicable that
it must necessarily be grounded in, and confirmed by, his constant
experience of the real world in which he lives and moves. Not that he
professes to be able to explain the _nature_ of this efficient influence
in which he believes. Even if he were a philosopher he might not be able
to satisfy himself or others on this point But being a plain man of
ordinary intelligence he has sense enough to distinguish between the
_existence_ of a fact and its _nature_, its explanation, its _quomodo_;
and to believe in the real existence of a _positive efficient, productive_
influence of cause on effect, however this influence is to be conceived or
explained.

A second argument for the objective validity of the concept of efficient
cause may be drawn from a consideration of the _Principle of Causality_.
The experience on which the plain man grounds his belief in the validity
of his notion of cause is not mere uninterpreted sense experience in its
raw and brute condition, so to speak; it is this sense experience
rationalized, assimilated into his intelligence—spontaneously and half
unconsciously, perhaps—by the light of the self-evident Principle of
Causality, that whatever happens has a cause. When the plain man believes
that all the various agencies in nature, like those enumerated above, are
not merely _temporal_ antecedents or concomitants of their effects, but
are _really productive_ of those effects, he is really applying the
universal and necessary truth—that an “event,” a “happening,” a “change,”
a “commencement” of any new actual mode of being demands the existence of
another actual being as cause—the truth embodied in the Principle of
Causality, to this, that, and the other event of his experience: he is
_locating_ the “causes” of these events in the various persons and things
which he regards as the agents or producers of these events. In making
such applications he may very possibly err in detail. But no actual
application of the principle at all is really required for establishing
the objective validity of the concept of cause. There are philosophers
who—erroneously, as we shall see—deny that the Principle of Causality
finds its application in the domain of _created_ things, who hold, in
other words, that no created beings can be efficient causes ( ), and who
nevertheless recognize, and quite rightly, that the concept of efficient
cause is an objectively valid concept. And they do so because they see
that since events, beginnings, happenings, changes, are real, there must
be really and objectively existent an efficient cause of them—whatever and
wherever such efficient cause may be: whether it be one or manifold,
finite or infinite, etc.


    We have already examined Hume’s attempt to deny the ontological
    necessity of the Principle of Causality and to substitute therefor
    a subjectively or psychologically necessary “feeling of
    expectation” grounded on habitual association of ideas. Kant, on
    the other hand, admits the self-evident, necessary character of
    the Principle; but holds that, since this necessity is engendered
    by the mind’s imposing a subjective form of thought on the data of
    sense consciousness, the principle is validly applicable only to
    connexions within the world of mental appearances, and not at all
    to the world of real being. He thus transfers the discussion to
    the domain of Epistemology, where in opposition to his theory of
    knowledge the Principle of Causality can be shown to be applicable
    to all contingent reality, and to be therefore legitimately
    employed in Natural Theology for the purpose of establishing the
    real existence of an Uncaused First Cause.


 . ORIGIN OF THE CONCEPT OF EFFICIENT CAUSE.—We have seen that universal
belief in the real existence of efficient causes is grounded in
experience. The formation of the concept, and its application or extension
to the world within and around us, are gradual.( ) Active power, force,
energy, efficiency, faculty, or by whatever other name we may call it, is
of course experienced only in its actual exercise, in action, motion,
production of change. Our first experience of its exercise is found in our
consciousness of our own personal activities, mental and bodily: in our
thinking, willing or choosing, in our deliberate control of our mental
processes, and in the deliberate exercise of our sense faculties and
bodily organs. In all this we are conscious of exerting power, force,
energy: we apprehend _ourselves_ as agents or efficient causes of our
mental processes and bodily movements. We apprehend these happenings as
due to the exercise of _our own power to produce them_. Seeing other human
beings behave like ourselves, we infer by analogy that they also possess
and exercise active powers like our own, that they, too, are efficient
causes. Finally, observing that effects like to those produced by
ourselves, whether in ourselves or in the material world around us, are
also consequent on certain other changes in external nature, whether
organic or inorganic, we infer by analogy that these corporeal things have
also powers, forces, energies, whereby they produce these effects. While
our senses testify only to time and space connexions between physical
happenings in external nature, our intellect apprehends action and
interaction, _i.e._ causal dependence of events on the active influence or
efficiency of physical things as agents or causes.( ) Thus, our
knowledge of the existence and nature of the forces, powers and energies
which constitute _material_ things efficient causes is posterior to, and
derived by analogy from, our knowledge of the _mental_ and bodily powers
which reveal themselves to us in our conscious vital processes as
constituting our own personal efficient causality.

This conception of efficient causality even in the inanimate things of
external nature, _after the analogy of our own vital powers_ as revealed
in our conscious activities, is sometimes disparaged as naïve
anthropomorphism. It just depends on the manner and degree in which we
press the analogy. Observing that our earlier notion of cause is “the
notion of power combined with a purpose and an end” (thus including
_efficient_ and _final_ causality), Newman remarks( ) that “Accordingly,
wherever the world is young, the movements and changes of physical nature
have been and are spontaneously ascribed by its people to the presence and
will of hidden agents, who haunt every part of it, the woods, the
mountains and the streams, the air and the stars, for good or for
evil—just as children again, by beating the ground after falling, imply
that what has bruised them has intelligence”. This is anthropomorphism.
So, too, would be the conception of the forces or powers of inanimate
nature as powers of sub-conscious “_perception_” and “_appetition_”
(Leibniz), or, again, as rudimentary or diminished “will-power”
(Cousin).( ) “Physical phenomena, as such, are without sense,” as Newman
rightly observes; and consequently we may not attribute to them any sort
of conscious efficiency, whether perceptive or appetitive. But Newman
appears to err in the opposite direction when he adds that “experience
teaches us nothing about physical phenomena as causes”.( ) The truth
lies between these extremes. Taking experience in the wide sense in which
it includes rational interpretation of, and inference from, the data of
internal and external sense perception, experience certainly reveals to us
the _existence_ of physical phenomena as efficient causes, or in other
words that there is real and efficient causality not only in our own
persons but also in the external physical universe; and as to the _nature_
of this causality it also gives us at least some little reliable
information.

By pursuing this latter question a little we shall be led to examine
certain difficulties which lie at the root of _Occasionalism_: the error
of denying that creatures, or at least merely corporeal creatures, can be
in any true sense efficient causes. A detailed inquiry into the nature of
the active powers, forces or energies of the inorganic universe, _i.e._
into the nature of _corporeal_ efficient causality, belongs to Cosmology;
just as a similar inquiry into _vital_, _sentient_ and _spiritual_
efficient causality belongs to Psychology. Here we have only to ascertain
what is common and essential to all efficient causality as such, what in
general is involved in the exercise of efficient causality, in _actio_ and
_passio_, and what are the main implications revealed in a study of it.

 . ANALYSIS OF EFFICIENT CAUSALITY, OR _Actio_ AND _Passio_: (_a_) THE
FIRST CAUSE AND CREATED CAUSES.—We have already referred to the universal
dependence of all created causes on the First Cause; and we shall have
occasion to return to it in connexion with Occasionalism. God has created
all second causes; He has given them their powers of action; He conserves
their being and their powers in existence; He applies these powers or puts
them in act; He concurs with all their actions; He is therefore the
_principal_ cause of all their effects; and in relation to Him they are as
instrumental causes: “Deus est causa actionis cujuslibet inquantum _dat_
virtutem agendi, et inquantum _conservat_ eam, et inquantum _applicat_
actioni, et inquantum _ejus virtute_ omnis alia virtus agit.”( )

In our analysis of change ( ) we saw why no finite, created agent can be
the _adequate_ cause of the _new actualities_ or perfections involved in
change, and how we are therefore obliged, by a necessity of thought, to
infer the existence of a First Cause, an Unchanging, Infinite Source of
these new actualities.( )

The principle upon which the argument was based is this: that the
actuality of the effect is something over and above the reality which it
had in the passive potentiality of its created material cause and in the
active powers of its created efficient cause antecedently to its
production: that therefore the production of this actuality, this _novum
esse_, implies the influence—by way of co-operation or _concursus_ with
the created efficient cause—of an Actual Being in whom the actuality of
all effects is contained in an eminently perfect way. Even with the Divine
_concursus_ a created cause cannot itself _create_, because even with this
_concursus_ its efficiency attains only to the modifying or changing of
pre-existing being: and in creation there is no pre-existing being, no
material cause, no real passive potentiality to be actuated. But _without_
this _concursus_ not only can it not create; it cannot even, as an
efficient cause, actuate a real pre-existing potentiality. And why?
Because its efficiency cannot attain to the _production of new actuality_.
It determines the mode of this actuality, and therein precisely lies the
efficiency of the created cause. But _the positive entity or perfection_
of this new actuality can be produced only by the Infinite, Changeless,
Inexhaustible Source of all actuality, co-operating with the created
cause( ) ( ).

But, it might be objected, perhaps created efficient causes are themselves
the adequate and absolutely independent principles of the whole actuality
of their effects? They cannot be such; and that for the simple reason that
they are not always _in act_. Were they such they should be always and
necessarily in act: they should always and necessarily contain in
themselves, and that actually and in an eminently perfect manner, all the
perfections of all the effects which they gradually produce in the
universe. But experience shows us that created causes are not always
acting, that their active power, their causality _in actu primo_ is not to
be identified with their action, their causality _in actu secundo_; and
reason tells us that since this is so, since action is something more than
_active power_, since a cause acting has more actuality than the same
cause not acting, it must have been determined or reduced to action by
some actuality other than itself. This surplus of actuality or perfection
in an acting cause, as compared with the same cause prior to its acting,
is the Divine _concursus_. In other words, an active power which is really
distinct from its action requires to be moved or reduced to _its_ act
(which is _actio_) no less than a passive potentiality required to be
moved to _its_ act (which is _passio_), by some really distinct actual
being. A created efficient cause, therefore, by passing from the state of
rest, or mere power to act, into the state of action, is perfected by
having its active power actualized, _i.e._ by the Divine _concursus_: in
this sense action is a perfection of the agent. But it is not an
entitative perfection of the latter’s essence; it is not a permanent or
stable elevation or perfection of the latter’s powers; it is not the
completion of any passive potentiality of the latter; nor therefore is it
properly speaking a _change_ of the agent as such; it is, as we have said
already, rather an index of the latter’s perfection in the scale of real
being.( ) Action really perfects the _patiens_; and only when this is
identical in its concrete individuality with the _agens_ is the latter
permanently perfected by the action.

The action of created causes, therefore, depends on the action of the
First Cause. We derive our notion of action from the former and apply it
analogically to the latter. If we compare them we shall find that,
notwithstanding many differences, the notion of action in general involves
a “simple” or “unmixed” perfection which can, without anthropomorphism, be
applied analogically to the Divine Action. The Divine Action is identical
with the Divine Power and the Divine Essence. In creatures essence, power
and action are really distinct. The Divine Action, when creative, has not
for its term a _change_ in the strict sense ( ,  ), for it produces
being _ex nihilo_, whereas the action of creatures cannot have for term
the production of new being _ex nihilo_, but only the change of
pre-existing being. The Divine Action, whether in creating or conserving
or concurring with creatures, implies in God no real transition from power
to act; whereas the action of creatures does imply such transition in
them. Such are the differences; but with them there is this point of
agreement: the Divine Action implies in God an efficiency which has for
its term _the origin of new being dependently on this efficiency_.( )
So, too, does the _action of creatures_. _Positive efficient influence on
the one side, and the origin, production, or _“fieri”_ of new actual being
on the other, with a relation of real dependence on this efficiency_: such
is the essential note of all efficient causality, whether of God or of
creatures.( )

 . (_b_) ACTIO IMMANENS AND ACTIO TRANSIENS.—Let us compare in the next
place the perfectly immanent spiritual causality of thought, the less
perfectly immanent organic causality of living things, and the transitive
physical causality of the agencies of inorganic nature. The term of an
immanent action remains either within the very faculty which elicits it,
affecting this faculty as a habit: thus acts of thought terminate in the
intellectual habits called _sciences_, acts of free choice in the habits
of will called _virtues_ or _vices_.( ) Or it remains at least within
the agent: as when in the vital process of nutrition the various parts and
members of the living organism so interact as procure the growth and
development of the living individual which is the cause of these
functions.( ) In those cases the agent itself is the _patiens_, whereas
every agency in the inorganic universe acts not upon itself, but only on
some other thing, _transitively_. But immanent action, no less than
transitive action, is productive of real change—not, of course, in the
physical sense in which this term is identified with “motion” and
understood of corporeal change, but in the metaphysical sense of an
_actuation of some passive potentiality_ ( ,  ).( )

What, then, do we find common to the immanent and the transitive causality
of created causes? _An active power or influence on the side of the agent,
an actuation of this active power_, either by the action of other causes
on this agent, or by the fulfilment of all conditions requisite for the
action of the agent, and in all cases by the concursus of the First Cause;
and, _on the side of the effect, the production of some new actuality, the
actuation of some passive potentiality, dependently on the cause_ now in
action.

Thus we see that in all cases _action_, or the exercise of efficient
causality, implies that _something which was not actual becomes actual_,
that _something which was not_, _now is_; and that this _becoming_, this
_actuation_, this _production_, is really and essentially dependent on the
influence, the efficiency, of some actual being or beings, which we
therefore call _efficient causes_.


     . ERRONEOUS THEORIES OF EFFICIENT CAUSALITY. IMAGINATION AND
    THOUGHT.—Are we certain of anything more about the nature of this
    connecting link between efficient cause and effect, which we call
    _action_? Speculations and theories there are indeed in abundance.
    Some of these can be shown to be false; and thus our knowledge of
    the real nature of action may be at least negatively if not
    positively perfected. Our concept of action is derived, like all
    our concepts, from experience; and although we are conscious of
    _spiritual_ action in the exercise of intellect and will, yet it
    is inseparably allied with sentient action and this again with
    organic and corporeal action. Nor can we conceive or describe
    spiritual action without the aid of imagination images, or in
    language other than that borrowed from the domain of corporeal
    things, which are the proper object of the human intellect.( )
    Now in all this there is a danger: the danger of mistaking
    imagination images for thoughts, and of giving a literal sense to
    language in contexts where this language must be rightly
    understood to apply only analogically.

    In analysing the nature of efficient causality we might be tempted
    to think that we understood it by imagining some sort of a _flow_
    or _transference_ of some sort of actual reality from _agens_ to
    _patiens_. It is quite true that in describing _action_, the
    actual connecting link between _agens_ and _patiens_, we have to
    use language suggestive of some such imagination image. We have no
    option in the matter, for all human language is based upon sense
    consciousness of physical phenomena. When we describe efficiency
    as an “influence” of cause on effect, or the effect as “dependent”
    on the cause, the former term suggests a “flowing,” just as the
    latter suggests a “hanging”. So, too, when we speak of the effect
    as “arising,” “originating,” “springing,” or “emanating,” from the
    cause.( ) But we have got to ask ourselves what such language
    _means_, _i.e._, what concepts it expresses, and not what
    imagination images accompany the use of it.

    Now when we reflect that the senses testify only to time and space
    sequences and collocations of the phenomena which we regard as
    causally connected, and when we feel convinced that there is
    something more than this in the causal connexion,—which something
    more we describe in the terms illustrated above,—we must inquire
    whether we have any rational ground for thinking that this
    something more is really anything in the nature of a spatial
    transference of some actual reality from _agens_ to _patiens_.
    There are indeed many philosophers and scientists who seem to
    believe that there is such a local transference of some actuality
    from cause to effect, that efficient causality is explained by it,
    and cannot be intelligibly explained otherwise. As a matter of
    fact there is no rational ground for believing in any such
    transference, and even were there such transference, so far from
    its being the only intelligible explanation of efficient
    causality, it would leave the whole problem entirely
    unexplained—and not merely the problem of spiritual, immanent
    causality, to which it is manifestly inapplicable, but even the
    problem of corporeal, transitive causality.( )

    We have already referred at some length ( - ) to the philosophy
    which has endeavoured to reduce all change, or at least all
    corporeal change, to mechanical change; all qualities, powers,
    forces, energies of the universe, to ultimate particles or atoms
    of matter in motion; and all efficient causality to a flow or
    transference of spatial motion from particle to particle or from
    body to body. A full analysis of all such theories belongs to
    Cosmology. But we may recall a few of the more obvious
    considerations already urged against them.

    In the first place, the attempt to explain all _qualities_ in the
    material universe—all the powers, forces, energies, of matter—by
    maintaining that objectively and extramentally they are all purely
    _quantitative_ realities, all spatial motions of matter—does not
    explain the qualitative factors and distinctions in the world of
    our sense experience at all, but simply transfers the problem of
    explaining them from the philosophy of matter to the philosophy of
    mind, by making them all subjective after the manner of Kant’s
    analysis of experience ( ).

    In the second place, when we endeavour to conceive, to apprehend
    intellectually, how _motion_, or indeed any other physical or real
    entity, could actually pass or be transferred from _agens_ to
    _patiens_, whether these be spatially in contact or not, we find
    such a supposition positively unintelligible. Motion is not a
    substance; and if it is an accident it cannot migrate from subject
    to subject. The idea that corporeal efficient causality—even
    mechanical causality—can be explained by such a transference of
    actual accidental modes of being from _agens_ to _patiens_ is
    based on a very crude and erroneous conception of what an
    accidental mode of being really is ( ).

    The more we reflect on the nature of real change in the universe,
    and of the efficient causality whereby it is realized, the more
    convinced we must become that there can be no satisfactory
    explanation of these facts which does not recognize and take
    account of this great fundamental fact: that contingent real being
    is _not all actual_, that it is partly potential and partly
    actual; that therefore our concepts of “passive potentiality” and
    “active power” are not mere subjective mental motions, with at
    best a mere regulative or systematizing function (after the manner
    of Kant’s philosophy), but that they are really and objectively
    valid concepts—concepts which from the time of Aristotle have
    given philosophers the only insight into the nature of efficient
    causality which is at any rate satisfactory and intelligible as
    far as it goes.

    Of this great fact the advocates of the mechanical theory of
    efficient causality have, in the third place, failed to take
    account. And it is partly because with the revival of atomism at
    the dawn of modern philosophy this traditional Aristotelian
    conception of contingent being as potential and actual was lost
    sight of ( ), that such a crude and really unintelligible account
    of efficient causality, as a “flow of motion,” has been able to
    find such continued and widespread acceptance.

    Another reason of the prevalence of this tendency to “explain” all
    physical efficient causality as a propagation of spatial motions
    of matter is to be found in the sensist view of the human mind
    which confounds intellectual thought with mental imagery, which
    countenances only _picturable_ factors in its “explanations,” and
    denounces as “metaphysical,” “occult,” and “unverifiable” all
    explanatory principles such as forces, powers, potentialities,
    etc., which are not directly picturable in the imagination.( )
    And it is a curious fact that it is such philosophers themselves
    who are really guilty of the charge which they lay at the door of
    the traditional metaphysics: the charge of offering
    explanations—of efficient causality, for instance—which are really
    no explanations. For while they put forward their theory of the
    “flow of motion” as a real explanation of the _quomodo_ of
    efficient causality—and the ultimate and only explanation of it
    within reach of the human mind, if we are to accept their view of
    the matter—the exponent of the traditional metaphysics more
    modestly confines himself to setting forth the inevitable
    implications of the fact of efficient causality, and, without
    purporting to offer any positive explanation of the real nature of
    action or efficient influence, he is content to supplement his
    analysis negatively by pointing out the unintelligible and
    illusory character of their proffered “explanations”.

    In the exact methods of the physical sciences, their quantitative
    evaluation of all corporeal forces whether mechanical, physical,
    or chemical, in terms of mechanical work, which is measured by the
    motion of matter through space, and in the great physical
    generalization known as the law of the equivalence of energies, or
    of the equality of action and reaction,—we can detect yet further
    apparent reasons for the conception of efficient causality as a
    mere transference or interchange of actual physical and measurable
    entities among bodies. It is an established fact not only that all
    corporeal agents gradually lose their energy or power of action by
    actually exercising this power, but that this loss of energy is in
    direct proportion to the amount of energy gained by the recipients
    of their action; and this fact would naturally suggest the mental
    picture of a transference of some actual measurable entity from
    cause to effect. But it does not necessarily imply such
    transference—even if the latter were intelligible, which, as we
    have seen, it is not. The fact is quite intelligibly explained by
    the natural supposition that in proportion as the _agens_ exhausts
    its active power by exercise the _patiens_ gains in some form of
    actuality. Similarly, the fact that all forms of corporeal energy
    can be measured in terms of mechanical energy does not at all
    imply that they all _really are_ mechanical energy, but only that
    natural agents can by the use of one form of energy produce
    another form in equivalent quantity. And finally, the law of the
    conservation of corporeal energy in the universe is explained by
    the law of the equality of action and reaction, and without
    recourse to the unintelligible supposition that this sum-total of
    energy is one unchanging and unchangeable _actuality_.

    There is just one other consideration which at first sight appears
    to favour the “transference” theory of causality, but which on
    analysis shows how illusory the proffered explanation is, and how
    unintelligible the simplest phenomenon of change must be to those
    who fail to grasp the profound significance of the principle that
    all real being which is subject to change must of necessity be
    _partly potential and partly actual_. We allude to the general
    assumption of physical scientists that corporeal action of
    whatsoever kind takes place _only on contact_, whether mediate or
    immediate, between the bodies in question.( ) Now it is well to
    bear in mind that this is not a self-evident truth or principle,
    but only an hypothesis, a very legitimate hypothesis and one which
    works admirably, but still only an hypothesis. It implies the
    assumption that some sort of substance—called the universal
    ether—actually exists and fills all space, serving as a medium for
    the action of gravitation, light, radiant heat, electricity and
    magnetism, between the earth and the other planets, the sun and
    the stars. This whole supposition is the only thinkable
    alternative to _actio in distans_. If those bodies really act on
    one another—and the fact that they do is undeniable,—and if there
    were no such medium between them, then the causal influence of one
    body should be able to produce an effect in another body spatially
    distant from, and not physically connected by any material medium
    with, the former. Hence two questions: Is this alternative, _actio
    in distans_, imaginable? _i.e._ can we form any _positive
    imagination image_ of _how_ this would take place? And secondly:
    Is it _thinkable_, _conceivable_, _intrinsically possible_? We
    need not hesitate to answer the former question in the negative.
    But as to the latter question all we can say is that we have never
    met any cogent proof of the intrinsic impossibility of _actio in
    distans_. The efficient action of a finite cause implies that it
    has active power and is conserved in existence with this power by
    the Creator or First Cause, that this power is reduced to act by
    the Divine _concursus_, and that _dependently on this cause so
    acting_ some change takes place, some potentiality is actualized
    in some other finite being. Nothing more than this is involved in
    the general concept of efficient causality. Of course real
    influence on the one side, and real dependence on the other, imply
    some _real_ connexion of cause with effect. But is _spatial_
    connexion a necessary condition of real connexion? Is a
    _physical_, _phenomenal_, _imaginable_, _efflux_ of some entity
    out of the cause into the effect, either immediately or through
    some medium as a channel, a necessary condition for real
    influence? There is nothing of the kind in spiritual causality;
    and to demand anything of the kind for causality in general would
    be to make imagination, not thought, the test and measure of the
    real. But perhaps _spatial_ connexion is essential to the real
    connexion involved in _this particular kind_ of causality,
    _corporeal_ causality? Perhaps. But it has never been proved. Too
    little is known about the reality of space, about the ultimate
    nature of material phenomena and their relation to our minds, to
    justify anything like dogmatism on such an ultimate question. It
    may well be that if we had a deeper insight into these things we
    could pronounce _actio in distans_ to be absolutely incompatible
    with the essences of the things which do as a matter of fact
    constitute the actual corporeal universe. But in the absence of
    such insight we cannot pronounce _actio in distans_ to be
    intrinsically impossible. Physical scientists assume that as a
    matter of fact bodies do not act _in distans_. Granted the
    assumption to be correct, it still remains an open question
    whether by a miracle they could act _in distans_, _i.e._ whether
    or not such action would be incompatible with their nature as
    finite corporeal causes.

    Owing to a very natural tendency to rest in imagination images we
    are inclined not only to pronounce as impossible any process the
    mode of which is not positively imaginable, but also to think that
    we rightly understand a process once we have provided ourselves
    with an imagination image of it—when as a matter of fact this
    image may cover an entirely groundless conception or theory of the
    process. Hence the fairly prevalent idea that while _actio in
    distans_ is impossible, _the interaction of bodies on contact_ is
    perfectly intelligible and presents no difficulties. When a
    billiard ball in motion strikes another at rest it communicates
    some or all of its motion to the other, and that is all: nothing
    simpler! And then all the physical, chemical, and substantial
    changes in the material universe are reducible to this common
    denominator! The atomic philosophy, with its two modest postulates
    of matter and motion, is a delightfully simple philosophy; but
    unfortunately for its philosophical prestige _it does not explain
    causality or change_. Nor can these facts be explained by any
    philosophy which ignores the most elementary implication of all
    real change: the implication that changing reality involves real
    passive potentialities and real active powers or forces in the
    phenomena which constitute the changing reality of the universe.


 . THE SUBJECT OF EFFICIENT CAUSALITY. OCCASIONALISM.—We have
established the objective validity of the concept of efficient causality
and analysed its implications. There have been philosophers who, while
admitting the objective validity of the concept, have maintained that no
creature, or at least no corporeal creature, can be an efficient cause.
Efficient influence is, in their view, incompatible with the nature of a
corporeal substance: only spiritual substances can be efficient causes:
corporeal things, conditions, and happenings, are all only the _occasions_
on which spiritual substances act efficiently in and through all created
nature. Hence the name of the theory: _Occasionalism_. There are two forms
of it: the milder, which admits that created spirits or minds are
efficient causes; and the more extreme view, according to which no
creature can be an efficient cause, inasmuch as efficient causality is
essentially a Divine attribute, a prerogative of the Divinity.

This error was not unknown in the Middle Ages,( ) but it was in the
seventeenth century that certain disciples of Descartes,—Geulincx
( - ) and Malebranche ( - ),—expressly inferred it from the
Cartesian antithesis of matter and spirit and the Cartesian doctrine that
matter is essentially inert, or inactive. According to the gratuitous and
unproven assertion laid down by Geulincx as a principle: _Quod nescis
quomodo fiat_, _id non facis_,—we do not cause our own sensations or
reasoning processes, nor our own bodily movements, inasmuch as we do not
know _how_ these take place; nor can bodies cause them, any more than our
own created spirits, inasmuch as bodies are essentially inactive.
According to Malebranche the mind can perceive no necessary _nexus_
between effects and any cause other than the Divine Will;( ) moreover
reflection convinces us that efficient causality is something essentially
Divine and incommunicable to creatures;( ) and finally neither bodies
can be causes, for they are essentially inert, nor our minds and wills,
for we do not know how a volition could move any organ or member of our
bodies.( ) Yet Malebranche, at the cost of inconsistency with his own
principles, safeguards free will in man by allowing an exclusively
_immanent_ efficiency to spiritual causes.( )

Such is the teaching of Occasionalism. Our criticism of it will be
brief.( )

( ) Against the doctrine that creatures generally are not, and cannot be,
efficient causes, we direct the first argument already outlined ( )
against Phenomenism and Positivism,—the argument from the universal belief
of mankind, based on the testimony of consciousness as rationally
interpreted by human intelligence. Consciousness testifies not merely that
processes of thought, imagination, sensation, volition, etc., _take place_
within our minds; not merely that our bodily movements, such as speaking,
walking, writing, _occur_; but that _we are the causes of them_.( ) It
is idle to say that we do not efficiently move our limbs because we may
not be able to understand or explain fully “_how_ an unextended volition
can move a material limb”.( ) Consciousness testifies to the fact that
the volition does move the limb; and that is enough.( ) The fact is one
thing, the _quomodo_ of the fact is quite another thing. Nor is there any
ground whatever for the assertion that a cause, in order to produce an
effect, must _understand how_ the exercise of its own efficiency brings
that effect about. Moreover, Malebranche’s concession of at least immanent
activity to the will is at all events an admission that there is in the
nature of the creature as such nothing incompatible with its being an
efficient cause.

( ) Although Malebranche bases his philosophy mainly on deductive, _a
priori_ reasonings from a consideration of the Divine attributes, his
system is really derogatory to the perfection of the First Cause, and
especially to the Divine Wisdom. To say, for instance, that God created an
organ so well adapted to discharge the function of seeing as the human
eye, and then to deny that the latter discharges this or any function, is
tantamount to accusing God of folly. There is no reason in this system why
any created thing or condition of things would be even the appropriate
_occasion_ of the First Cause producing any definite effect. Everything
would be an equally appropriate occasion, or rather nothing would be in
any intelligible sense an appropriate occasion, for any exercise of the
Divine causality. The admirable order of the universe—with its unity in
variety, its adaptation of means to ends, its gradation of created
perfections—is an intelligible manifestation of the Divine perfections on
the assumption that creatures efficiently co-operate with the First Cause
in realizing and maintaining this order. But if they were all inert,
inoperative, useless for this purpose, what could be the _raison d’être_
of their diversified endowments and perfections? So far from manifesting
the wisdom, power and goodness of God they would evidence an aimless and
senseless prodigality.

( ) Occasionalism imperils the distinction between creatures and a
personal God. Although Malebranche, fervent catholic that he was,
protested against the pantheism of “le misérable Spinoza,” his own system
contains the undeveloped germ of this pernicious error. For, if creatures
are not efficient causes not only are their variety and multiplicity
meaningless, as contributing nothing towards the order of the universe,
but their very existence _as distinct realities_ seems to have no _raison
d’être_. Malebranche emphasizes the truth that _God does nothing useless_:
_Dieu ne fait rien d’inutile_. Very well. If, then, a being _does
nothing_, what purpose is served by its existence? Of what use is it? What
is the measure of a creature’s reality, if not its action and its power of
action? So intimately in fact is this notion of causality bound up with
the notion of the very reality of things that the concept of an absolutely
inert, inactive reality is scarcely intelligible. It is almost an axiom in
scholastic philosophy that every nature has its correlative activity,
every being its operation: _Omne ens est propter suam operationem; Omnis
natura ordinatur ad propriam operationem_. Hence if what we call creatures
had really no proper activity distinct from that of the First Cause, on
what grounds could we suppose them to have a real and proper existence of
their own distinct from the reality of the Infinite Being? Or who could
question the lawfulness of the inference that they are not really
creatures, but only so many phases, aspects, manifestations of the one and
sole existing reality? Which is Pantheism.

( ) Occasionalism leads to Subjective Idealism by destroying all ground
for the objective validity of human science. How do we know the real
natures of things? By reasoning from their activities in virtue of the
principle, _Operari sequitur esse_.( ) But if things have no activities,
no operations, such reasoning is illusory. How, for instance, do we
justify by rational demonstration, in opposition to subjectivism, the
common-sense interpretation of the data of sense consciousness as
revealing to us the real and extramental existence of a material universe?
By arguing, in virtue of the principle of causality, from our
consciousness of our own passivity in external sense perception, to the
real existence of bodies outside our minds, as _excitants_ of our
cognitive activity and _partial causes_ of these conscious, perceptive
processes. But if occasionalism were true such inference would be
illusory, and we should infer, with Berkeley, that only God and minds
exist, but not any material universe. Malebranche admits the possible
validity of this inference to immaterialism from his principles, and
grounds his own belief in the existence of an external material universe
solely on faith in Divine Revelation.( )

It only remains to answer certain difficulties urged by occasionalists
against the possibility of attributing real efficiency to creatures.

( ) They argue that efficient causality is something essentially Divine,
and therefore cannot be communicated to creatures.

We reply that while the absolutely independent causality of the First
Cause is essentially Divine, another kind or order of causality, dependent
on the former, but none the less real, can be and is communicated to
creatures. And just as the fact that creatures have real being, real
existence, distinct from, but dependent on, the existence of the Infinite
Being, does not derogate from the supremacy of the latter, so the fact
that creatures have real efficient causality, distinct from, but dependent
on, the causality of the First Cause, does not derogate from the latter’s
supremacy.

( ) They urge that efficient causality is creative, and therefore infinite
and incommunicable.

We reply that there is a plain distinction between creative activity and
the efficient activity we claim for creatures. Creation is the production
of new being from nothingness. God alone, the Infinite Being, can create;
and, furthermore, according to the common view of Theistic philosophers a
creature cannot even be an instrument of the First Cause in this
production of new being from nothingness. And the main reason for this
appears to be that the efficiency of the creature, acting, of course, with
the Divine _concursus_, necessarily presupposes some pre-existing being as
material on which to operate, and is confined to the _change_ or
_determination of new forms or modes_ of this pre-existing reality. Such
efficiency, subordinate to the Divine _concursus_ and limited to such an
order of effects, is plainly distinct from creative activity.

( ) But the creature, acting with the Divine _concursus_, either
contributes something real and positive to the effect or contributes
nothing. The former alternative is inadmissible, for God is the cause of
everything real and positive: _omne novum ens est a Deo_. And in the
latter alternative, which is the true one, the _concursus_ is superfluous;
God does all; and creatures are not really efficient causes.

We reply that the former alternative, not the latter, is the true one. But
the former alternative does not imply that the creature produces any new
reality _independently of the First Cause_; nor is it incompatible with
the truth that God is the author and cause of all positive reality: _omne
novum ens est a Deo_. No doubt, were we to conceive the co-operation of
God and the creature after the manner of the co-operation of two partial
causes of the same order, producing by their joint efficiency some one
total effect—like the co-operation of two horses drawing a cart,—it would
follow that the creature’s share of the joint effect would be independent
of the Divine _concursus_ and attributable to the creature alone, that the
creature would produce some reality independently of the First Cause. But
that is _not_ the way in which the First Cause concurs with created
causes. They are not partial causes of the same order. Each is a total
cause in its own order. They so co-operate that God, besides having
created and now conserving the second cause, and moving the latter’s power
to act, produces Himself the whole effect directly and immediately by the
efficiency of His _concursus_; while at the same time the second cause,
thus reduced to act, and acting with the _concursus_, also directly and
immediately produces the whole effect. There is one effect, one change _in
facto esse_, one change _in fieri_, and therefore one action as considered
in the subject changed, since the action takes place in this latter:
_actio fit in passo_. This change, this action considered thus passively,
or “_in passo_,” is the total term of each efficiency, the Divine and the
created, not partly of the one and partly of the other. It is one and
indivisible; it is wholly due to, and wholly attained by, each efficiency;
not, however, under the same formal aspect. We may distinguish in it two
formalities: it is a _novum ens_, a new actuality, something positive and
actual superadded to the existing order of real, contingent being; but it
is not “being in general” or “actuality in general,” it is some
specifically, nay individually, determinate mode of actuality or actual
being. We have seen that it is precisely because every real effect has the
former aspect that it demands for its adequate explanation, and as its
only intelligible source, the presence and influence of a purely actual,
unchanging, infinite, inexhaustible productive principle of all actual
contingent reality: hence the necessity and efficacy of the Divine
_concursus_. And similarly it is because the new actuality involved in
every change is an individually definite mode of actuality that we can
detect in it the need for, and the efficacy of, the created cause: the
nature of this latter, the character and scope and intensity of its active
power is what determines the individuality of the total result, to the
total production of which it has by the aid of the Divine _concursus_
attained.

( ) But God can Himself produce the total result _under both formalities_
without any efficiency of the creature. Therefore the difficulty remains
that the latter efficiency is superfluous and useless: and _entia non sunt
multiplicanda praeter necessitatem_.

We reply that as a matter of fact the effects produced in the ordinary
course of nature are produced by God under both formalities; but also by
the created cause under both formalities: inasmuch as the formalities are
but mentally distinct aspects of one real result which is, as regards its
extrinsic causes, individual and indivisible. The distinction of these
formal aspects only helps us to realize how _de facto_ such an effect is
due to the cooperation of the First Cause and created causes. That God
_could_ produce all such effects without any created causes—we must
distinguish. Some such effects He could not produce without created
causes, for such production would be self-contradictory. He could not
produce, for instance, a volition except as the act of a created will, or
a thought except as the act of a created intellect, or a vital change
except as the act of a living creature. But apart from such cases which
would involve an intrinsic impossibility, God could of course produce,
without created agents, the effects which He does produce through their
created efficiency. It is, however, not a question of what _could be_, but
of what _actually is_. And we think that the arguments already set forth
prove conclusively that creatures are not _de facto_ the inert, inactive,
aimless and unmeaning things they would be if Occasionalism were the true
interpretation of the universe of our actual experience; but that these
creatures are in a true sense efficient causes, and that just as by their
very co-existence with God, as contingent beings, they do not derogate
from His Infinite Actuality but rather show forth His Infinity, so by
their cooperation with Him as subordinate and dependent efficient causes
they do not derogate from His supremacy as First Cause, but rather show
forth the infinite and inexhaustible riches of His Wisdom and Omnipotence.





CHAPTER XV. FINAL CAUSES; UNIVERSAL ORDER.


 . TWO CONCEPTIONS OF EXPERIENCE, THE MECHANICAL AND THE
TELEOLOGICAL.—We have seen that all change in the universe demands for its
explanation certain real principles, _viz._ passive potentiality,
actualization, and active power or efficiency; in other words that it
points to material, formal and efficient causes. Do these principles
suffice to explain the course of nature to the inquiring mind? Mechanists
say, Yes; these principles explain it so far as it is capable of
explanation. Teleologists say, No; these principles do not of themselves
account for the universe of our experience: this universe reveals itself
as a _cosmos_: hence it demands for its explanation real principles or
causes of another sort, _final causes_, the existence of which implies
purpose, plan or design, and therefore also intelligence.

The problem whether or not the universe manifests the existence and
influence of final causes has been sometimes formulated in this striking
fashion: Is it that birds have wings in order to fly, or is it merely that
they fly because they have wings? Such a graphic statement of the problem
is misleading, for it suggests that the alternatives are mutually
exclusive, that we must vote either for final causes or for efficient
causes. As a matter of fact we accept both. Efficient causes account for
the course of nature; but they need to be determined by the influence of
final causes. Moreover, the question how far this influence of final
causes extends—_finality_ (_finalitas_), as it is technically termed—is a
secondary question; nor does the advocate of final causality in the
universe undertake to decide its nature and scope in every instance and
detail, any more than the physical scientist does to point out all the
physical laws embodied in an individual natural event, or the biologist to
say whether a doubtful specimen of matter is organic or inorganic, or
whether a certain sort of living cell is animal or vegetable. The
teleologist’s thesis, as against that of mechanism, is simply that _there
are final causes in the universe, that the universe does really manifest
the presence and influence of final causes_.( )

There are two ways, however, of conceiving this influence as permeating
the universe. The conception of final causality in general is, as we shall
see, the conception of acting _for an end_, from a _motive_, with a
_purpose_, _plan_ or _design_ for the attainment of something. It implies
arrangement, ordination, adaptation of means to ends ( ). Now at least
there _appears_ to be, pervading the universe everywhere and directing its
activities, such an adaptation. The admirable equilibrium of forces which
secures the regular motions of the heavenly bodies; the exact mixture of
gases which makes our atmosphere suitable for organic life; the distance
and relative positions of the sun and the earth, which secure conditions
favourable to organic life; the chemical transformations whereby inorganic
elements and compounds go to form the living substance of plants and are
thus prepared for assimilation as food by animal organisms; the
wonderfully graded hierarchy of living species in the animate world, and
the mutual interdependence of plants and animals; the endless variety of
instincts which secure the preservation and well-being of living
individuals and species; most notably the adaptability and adaptation of
other mundane creatures to human uses by man himself,—innumerable facts
such as these convince us that the things of the universe are _useful to
one another_, that they are constituted and disposed in relation to one
another _as if they had been deliberately chosen_ to suit one another, to
fit in harmoniously together in mutual co-ordination and subordination so
that by their interaction and interdependence they work out a plan or
design and _subserve as means to definite ends_. This suitability of
things _relatively to one another_, this harmony of the nature and
activity of each with the nature and activity of every other, we may
designate as _extrinsic_ finality. The Creator has willed so to arrange
and dispose all creatures in conditions of space and time that such
harmonious but purely extrinsic relations of mutual adaptation do _de
facto_ obtain and continue to prevail between them under His guidance.

But are these creatures themselves, in their own individual natures,
equally indifferent to any definite mode of action, so that the orderly
concurrence of their activities is due to an initial collocation and
impulse divinely impressed upon them from without, and not to any
purposive principle intrinsic to themselves individually? Descartes,
Leibniz and certain supporters of the theory of atomic dynamism regarding
the constitution of matter, while recognizing a relative and extrinsic
finality in the universe in the sense explained, seem to regard the
individual agencies of the universe as mere efficient causes, not of
themselves endowed with any immanent, intrinsic directive principle of
their activities, and so contributing by mere extrinsic arrangement to the
order of the universe. Scholastic philosophers, on the contrary, following
the thought of Aristotle,( ) consider that every agency in the universe
is endowed with an _intrinsic principle of finality_ which constantly
directs its activities towards the realization of a perfection which is
proper to it and which constitutes its intrinsic end ( - ). And while
each thus tends to its own proper perfection by the natural play of its
activities, each is so related to all others that they simultaneously
realize the extrinsic purpose which consists in the order and harmony of
the whole universe. Thus the extrinsic and relative finality whereby all
conspire to constitute the universe a _cosmos_ is secondary and posterior
and subordinate to the deeper, intrinsic, immanent and absolute finality
whereby each individual created nature moves by a tendency or law of its
being towards the realization of a _good_ which _perfects_ it as its
natural end.

In order to understand the nature of this intrinsic and extrinsic finality
in the universe, and to vindicate its existence against the philosophy of
Mechanism, we must next analyse the concept, and investigate the
influence, of what are called _final causes_.

 . THE CONCEPT OF FINAL CAUSE; ITS OBJECTIVE VALIDITY IN ALL NATURE.
CLASSIFICATION OF FINAL CAUSES.—When we speak of the _end_ of the year, or
the _end_ of a wall, we mean the extreme limit or ultimate point; and the
term conveys no notion of a cause. Similarly, were a person to say “I have
got to the _end_ of my work,” we should understand him to mean simply that
he had finished it. But when people act deliberately and as intelligent
beings, they usually act for some _conscious purpose_, with some _object
in view_, for the achievement or attainment of something; they continue to
act until they have attained this object; when they have attained it they
cease to act; its attainment synchronizes with the _end_ of their action,
taking this term in the sense just illustrated. Probably this is the
reason why the term _end_ has been extended from its original sense to
signify the _object_ for the attainment of which an intelligent agent
acts. This object of conscious desire _induces_ the agent to seek it; and
because it thus influences the agent to act it verifies the notion of a
_cause_: it is a _final cause_, an _end_ in the causal sense. For
instance, a young man wishes to become a medical doctor: the _art of
healing_ is the _end_ he wishes to secure. For this purpose he pursues a
course of studies and passes certain examinations; these acts whereby he
qualifies himself by obtaining a certain fund of knowledge and skill are
_means_ to the end intended by him. He need not desire these preparatory
labours _for their own sake_; but he does desire them as _useful for his
purpose_, as _means_ to his end: in so far as he wills them as means he
wills them not for their own sake but because of the end, _propter finem_.
He _apprehends_ the end as a _good_; he _intends_ its attainment; he
_elects_ or _selects_ certain acts or lines of action as means suitable
for this purpose. An end or final cause, therefore, may be defined as
_something apprehended as a good, and which, because desired as such,
influences the will to choose some action or line of action judged
necessary or useful for the attainment of this good_. Hence Aristotle’s
definition of end as τὸ οὖ ἕνεκα: id cujus gratia aliquid fit: _that for
the sake of which an agent acts_.

The end understood in this sense is a _motive_ of action; not only would
the action not take place without the agent’s intending the end, showing
the latter to be a _conditio sine qua non_; but, more than this, the end
as a good, apprehended and willed, _has a positive influence_ on the
ultimate effect or issue, so that it is really a _cause_.

Man is conscious of this “finality,” or influence of final causes on his
own deliberate actions. As an intelligent being he acts “for ends,” and
orders or regulates his actions as means to those ends; so much so that
when we see a man’s acts, his whole conduct, utterly unrelated to rational
ends, wholly at variance and out of joint with the usual ends of
intelligent human activity, we take it as an indication of loss of reason,
insanity. Furthermore, man is free; he _chooses_ the ends for which he
acts; he acts _electivé propter fines_.

But in the domain of animal life and activity is there any evidence of the
influence of final causes? Most undoubtedly. Watch the movements of
animals seeking their prey; observe the wide domain of animal instincts;
study the elaborate and intricate lines of action whereby they protect and
foster and preserve their lives, and rear their young and propagate their
species: could there be clearer or more abundant evidence that in all this
conduct they are _influenced_ by objects which they _apprehend_ and seek
as _sensible goods_? Not that they can conceive in the abstract the _ratio
bonitatis_ in these things, or freely choose them as good, for they are
incapable of abstract thought and consequent free choice; but that these
sensible objects, apprehended by them in the concrete, do really influence
or move their sense appetites to desire and seek them; and the influence
of an object on sense appetite springs from the goodness of this object
( ,  ). They tend towards _apprehended_ goods; they act _apprehensivé
propter fines_.( )

Finally, even in the domains of unconscious agencies, of plant life and
inorganic nature, we have evidence of the influence of final causes. For
here too we witness innumerable varied, complex, ever-renewed activities,
constantly issuing in results useful to, and good for, the agents which
elicit them: operations which contribute to the _development_ and
_perfection_ of the natures of these agents ( ). Now if similar effects
demand similar causes how can we refuse to recognize even in these
activities of physical nature the influence of final causes? Whenever and
wherever we find a great and complex variety of active powers, forces,
energies, issuing invariably in effects which suit and develop and perfect
the agents in question,—in a word, which are _good_ for these
agents,—whether the latter be conscious or unconscious, does not reason
itself dictate to us that all such domains of action must be subject to
the influence of final causes? Of course it would be mere unreflecting
anthropomorphism to attribute to _unconscious_ agencies a _conscious_
subjection to the attracting and directing influence of such causes. But
the recognition of such influence in this domain implies no naïve
supposition of that sort. It does, however, imply this very reasonable
view: that there must be some reason or ground in the nature or
constitution of even an inanimate agent for its acting always in a uniform
manner, conducive to its own development and perfection; that there must
be in the nature of each and every one of the vast multitude of such
agents which make up the whole physical universe a reason or ground for
each co-operating constantly and harmoniously with all the others to
secure and preserve that general order and regularity which enables us to
pronounce the universe not a _chaos_ but a _cosmos_. Now that ground or
reason in things, whereby they act in such a manner—not indifferently,
chaotically, capriciously, aimlessly, _unintelligibly_, but definitely,
regularly, reliably, purposively, _intelligibly_—is a real principle of
their natures, impressing on their natures a definite tendency, directive
of their activities towards results which, as being suited to these
natures, bear to these latter the relation of final causes. A directive
principle need not itself be conscious; the inner directive principle of
inanimate agents towards what is _good_ for them, what _perfects_ them,
what is therefore in a true and real sense their end ( ,  ), is not
conscious. But in virtue of it they act as if they were conscious, nay
intelligent, _i.e._ they act _executivé propter fines_.


    Of course the existence of this principle in inanimate agencies
    necessarily _implies_ intelligence: this indeed is our very
    contention against the whole philosophy of mechanism, positivism
    and agnosticism. But is this intelligence really identical with
    the agencies of nature, so that all the phenomena of experience,
    which constitute the _cosmos_ or universe, are but phases in the
    evolution of One Sole Reality which is continually manifesting
    itself under the distinct aspects of nature and mind? Or is this
    intelligence, though _virtually immanent_ in the universe, really
    distinct from it—_really transcendent_,—a Supreme Intelligence
    which has created and continues to conserve this universe and
    govern all its activities? This is a distinct question: it is the
    question of Monism or Theism as an ultimate interpretation of
    human experience.


We conclude then that what we call _finality_, or the influence of final
causes, pervades the whole universe; that in the domain of conscious
agents it is _conscious_, _instinctive_ when it solicits _sense appetite_,
_voluntary_ when it solicits _intelligent will_; that in the domain of
unconscious agencies it is not conscious but “_natural_” or “_physical_”
soliciting the “_nature_” or “_appetitus naturalis_” of these agencies.

Before inquiring into the nature of final causality we may indicate
briefly the main divisions of final causes: some of these concern the
domain of human activity and are of importance to Ethics rather than to
Ontology.

(_a_) We have already distinguished between _intrinsic_ and _extrinsic_
finality. An intrinsic final cause is an end or object which perfects the
nature itself of the agent which tends towards it: nourishment, for
instance, is an intrinsic end in relation to the living organism. An
extrinsic final cause is not one towards which the nature of the agent
immediately tends, but one which, intended by some other agent, is _de
facto_ realized by the tendency of the former towards its own intrinsic
end. Thus, the general order of the universe is an extrinsic end in
relation to each individual agency in the universe: it is an end intended
by the Creator and _de facto_ realized by each individual agency acting in
accordance with its own particular nature.

(_b_) Very similar to this is the familiar distinction between the _finis
operis_ and the _finis operantis_. The former is the end necessarily and
_de facto_ realized by the act itself, by its very nature, independently
of any other end the agent may have expressly intended to attain by means
of it. The latter is the end expressly intended by the agent, and which
may vary for one and the same kind of act. For instance, the _finis
operis_ of an act of almsgiving is the actual aiding of the mendicant; the
_finis operantis_ may be charity, or self-denial, or vanity, or whatever
other motive influences the giver.

(_c_) Akin to those also is the distinction between an unconscious, or
physical, or “natural” end, and a conscious, or mental, or “intentional”
end. The former is that towards which the nature or “_appetitus
naturalis_” of unconscious agencies tends; the latter is an end
apprehended by a conscious agent.

(_d_) An end may be either _ultimate_ or _proximate_ or _intermediate_. An
ultimate end is one which is sought for its own sake, as contrasted with
an intermediate end which is willed rather as a means to the former, and
with a proximate end which is intended last and sought first as a means to
realizing the others. It should be noted that proximate and intermediate
ends, in so far as they are sought for the sake of some ulterior end, are
not ends at all but rather means; only in so far as they present some good
desirable for its own sake, are they properly ends, or final causes.
Furthermore, an ultimate end may be such absolutely or relatively:
absolutely if it cannot possibly be subordinated or referred to any
ulterior or higher good; relatively if, though ultimate in a particular
order as compared with means leading up to it, it is nevertheless capable
of being subordinated to a higher good, though not actually referred to
this latter by any explicit volition of the agent that seeks it.

(_e_) We can regard the end for which an agent acts either
_objectively_,—_finis_ “_objectivus_,”—or _formally_,—_finis_
“_formalis_”. The former is the objective good itself which the agent
wishes to realize, possess or enjoy; the latter is the act whereby the
agent formally secures, appropriates, unites himself with, this objective
good. Thus, God Himself is the objective happiness (_beatitudo objectiva_)
of man, while man’s actual possession of, or union with, God, by knowledge
and love, is man’s formal happiness (_beatitudo formalis_).

(_f_) We may distinguish also between the _real_ end (_finis_ “_qui_” or
“_cujus_”, and the _personal_ end (_finis_ “_cui_”). The former is the
good _which_ the agent desires, the good for the sake of _which_ “_cujus_”
_gratia_) he acts. The latter is the subject or person _to whom_ he wishes
this good, or _for whom_ he wishes to procure it. Thus, a labourer may
work to earn _a sustenance_ for _himself_ or also for _his family_. The
real and the personal end are never willed separately, but always as one
concrete good.

(_g_) The distinction between a _principal_ end and an _accessory_ end
(motivum “_impulsivum_”) is obvious. The former can move to act of itself
without the latter, but the latter strengthens the influence of the
former. A really charitable person, while efficaciously moved to give alms
by sympathy with the poor, may not be uninfluenced by vanity to let others
know of his charity.


    (_h_) Finally we may note the theological distinction between the
    _natural_ end, and the _supernatural_ end, of man as a rational
    and moral agent. The former is the end _due_ to man’s nature, the
    latter is an end which is gratuitous and undue to his nature. God
    might not have created the world or man, and in this sense even
    the natural end of man is a gratuitous gift of God; but granted
    that God did decree to create the world and man, an end
    corresponding to man’s nature and powers was due to him: the
    knowledge, service and love of God as known to man by the light of
    natural reason. But as a matter of fact God, in His actual
    providence, has decreed for man an incomparably higher and purely
    gratuitous end, an end revealed to man by God Himself, an end
    entirely undue not only to man but to any and every possible
    creature: the Beatific Vision of the Divine Essence for ever in
    heaven.


 . CAUSALITY OF THE FINAL CAUSE; RELATION OF THE LATTER TO EFFICIENT,
FORMAL, AND MATERIAL CAUSES.—We can best analyse the influence of the
final cause by studying this influence as exerted on conscious and
intelligent agents. The final cause has a positive influence of some sort
on the production, happening, actualization of effects. What is the nature
of this influence? The final cause exerts its influence by being _a __
good_, an apprehended good; it exerts this influence on the appetite of
the agent, soliciting the latter to perform certain acts for the
realization, attainment, possession, or enjoyment of this good. But it
must not be conceived as the _efficient cause_ of this movement of the
appetite, nor may its influence be conceived as _action_. An efficient
cause must actually exist in order to act; but when the final cause, as an
apprehended good, exerts its influence on the appetite _it is not yet
actual_: not until the agent, by his action, has realized the end and
actually attained it, does the end, as a good, actually exist. We must
distinguish between the end _as attained_ and the end _as intended_,
between the _finis in executione_ and the _finis in intentione_. It is not
the end as attained that is a final cause; as attained it is an effect
pure and simple. It is the end as intended that is a final cause; and as
intended it does not yet actually exist: hence its influence cannot be by
way of _action_. Perhaps it is the _idea_ or _cognition_ of the intended
end that exerts the peculiar influence of final cause? No; the _idea_ or
_cognition_ of the end actually exists, no doubt, in the conscious agent,
but this is only a condition, a _conditio sine qua non_, for the
apprehended good, the final cause, to exert its influence: _nil volitum
nisi praecognitum_. It is not the cognition of the good, however, that
moves the agent to act, it is not the idea of the good that the agent
desires or strives for, but the good itself. It is the good itself, the
known good, that exerts the influence, and this influence consists in the
_passive inclination_ or _attraction_ or _tendency_ of the appetite
towards the good: a tendency which necessarily results from the very
presence of the good (not really or physically of course, but
representatively, mentally, “_intentionally_,” by “_esse intentionale_”;
cf.  ) in the agent’s consciousness, and which is formally the
actualization of the causal power or influence of the final cause. “Just
as the efficient cause influences by acting,” says St. Thomas,( ) “so
the final cause influences by being yearned for and desired”.

Looked at from the side of the agent that undergoes it, this influence is
a _passive yielding_: this next becomes an _active_ motion of appetite;
and in the case of free will a deliberate act of intending the end,
followed by acts of choosing means, and finally by acts commanding the
executive faculties to employ these means.

Looked at from the side of the final cause, the influence consists in an
_attraction_ of appetite towards union with itself as a good. The matter
cannot be analysed much further; nor will imagination images help us here
any more than in the case of efficient causality. It must be noted,
however, that the influence of the final cause is the influence not of a
reality as actual, or in its _esse actuale_, but of a reality as present
to a perceiving mind, or in its _esse intentionale_. At the same time it
would be a mistake to infer from this that the influence of the final
cause is not _real_. It is sometimes described as “intentional” causality,
“_causalitas intentionalis_”; but this must not be taken to mean that it
is not real: for it is not the “_esse intentionale_” of the good, _i.e._
the cognition of the good, its presence in the mind or consciousness of
the agent, that moves the latter’s appetite: it is the apprehended good,
apprehended _as real_, as possible of actual attainment, that moves the
agent to act. The influence may not be _physical_ in the sense of being
productive of, or interchangeable with, or measurable by, corporeal
energy, or in terms of mechanical work; nor is it; but it is none the less
real.

But if the influence of a final cause really reaches to the effect of the
agent’s actions only through the medium of the latter’s appetite, and
therefore through a link of “intentional” causality, does it not at once
follow that the attribution of final causality to the domain of
unconscious and inorganic activities, can be at best merely metaphorical?
The attribution to such agencies of an “_appetitus naturalis_” is
intelligible indeed as a striking and perhaps not unpoetic metaphor. But
to contend that it is anything more than a metaphor, to claim seriously
that inanimate agencies are swayed and influenced by “ends,”—is not this
really to substitute mysticism and mystery for rational speculation and
analysis?

Mechanists are wont to dismiss the doctrine of final causes in the
physical universe with offhand charges of this kind. They are but too
ready to attribute it to a mystical attitude of mind. Final causes, they
say, are not discovered in inanimate nature by the cold, calculating,
unemotional analysis to which reason submits its activities, but are read
into it by minds which allow themselves to be prompted by the imagination
and emotions to personify and anthropomorphize inanimate agencies. The
accusation is as plausible as it is unjust. It is plausible because the
attribution of final causes to inanimate nature, and of an “appetitus
_naturalis_” to its agencies, _seems_ to imply the recognition of
conscious, mental, “intentional” influence in this domain. But it really
implies nothing of the sort; and hence the injustice of the charge. What
it does imply is the existence of a genuine _analogy_ between the nature
and natural activities of physical agencies on the one hand and the
appetite and appetitive activities of conscious agencies on the other. The
existence of this analogy is absolutely undeniable. The orderly,
invariable and uniformly suitable character of physical activities, simply
forces our reason to recognize in physical agencies _natures_ which tend
towards their development, and which by their activities attain to what is
_good_ for them, to what _perfects_ them. In other words we have to
recognize that each by its natural line of activity attains to results
that are good and useful to it _just as if_ it apprehended them as such
and consciously tended towards them. The analogy is there; and the
recognition of it, so far from being a “mystic” interpretation of facts,
is an elementary logical exercise of our reasoning faculty. The
scholastics emphasized their recognition of the analogy by calling the
_nature_ of an unconscious agent,—the principle of its active tendencies
towards the realization of its own perfection—an “_appetitus naturalis_”:
an expression into which no one familiar with scholastic terminology would
venture to read any element of mysticism.( )

Every separate agency in nature has a uniform mode of activity; by
following out this line of action each co-operates with all the others in
maintaining the orderly course of nature. These are facts which call for
explanation. They are not explained by the supposition of mechanists that
these agencies are mere efficient causes: efficient causality does not
account for order, it has got simply nothing to do with order or
regularity. Consequently the last word of the mechanical philosophy on the
fact of order in the universe is—Agnosticism. In opposition to this
attitude we are far from contending that there is no mystery, or that all
is clear either in regard to the fact of _change_ or the fact of
_regularity_. Just as we cannot explain everything in _efficient_
causality, so neither can we explain everything in _final_ causality. But
we do contend that the element of order, development, evolution, even in
the physical universe, can be partially explained by recognizing in its
several agencies a _nature_, a principle of development, a passive
inclination implanted in the very being of these agencies by the
Intelligent Author of their being.

In conscious agencies this inclination or tendency to actions conformable
or _connatural_ to their being is not always in act; it is aroused by
conscious cognition, perception, or imagination of a _good_, and operates
intermittently. In unconscious agencies it is congenital and constantly in
act, _i.e._ as a tendency, not as actually operative: for its actual
development due conditions of environment are required: the seed will not
grow without a suitable soil, temperature, moisture, etc. In conscious
agencies the tendency, considered entitatively or as a reality in them, is
an _accidental form_; in unconscious agencies it is their _forma
substantialis_, the formative substantial principle, which determines the
specific type to which their nature belongs.( )

In all agencies the inclination or appetite or tendency to action arises
from a form; an elicited appetite from an “intentional” form, a natural
appetite from a “natural” form: _Omnis inclinatio seu appetitus
consequitur formam; appetitus elicitus formam intentionalem, appetitus
naturalis formam naturalem_. The scholastic view that final causality
pervades all things is expressed in the aphorism, _Omne agens agit propter
finem_: Every agency acts for an end.

From our analysis of final causality it will be seen that the “end”
becomes a cause by exercising its influence on the agent or efficient
cause, and thus initiating the action of the latter. We have seen already
that material and formal causes exercise their causality dependently on
the efficient cause of the change or effect produced by the latter. We now
see that the final cause, the end as _intended_, determines the action of
the efficient cause; hence its causality holds the primacy as compared
with that of the other causes: it is in this sense the cause of causes,
_causa causarum_.( ) But while the end _as intended_ is the starting
point of the whole process, the end _as attained_ is the ultimate term of
the latter. Hence the scholastic aphorism: _Finis est primus in intentione
et ultimus in executione_. And this is true where the process involves a
series of acts attaining to means subordinate to an end: this latter is
the first thing intended and the last attained.

The final cause, the end as intended, is extrinsic to the effect. It is
intrinsic to the efficient cause. It is a “_forma_” or determinative
principle of the latter: a _forma intentionalis_ in conscious agents, a
_forma naturalis_ in unconscious agents.

 . NATURE AND THE LAWS OF NATURE. CHARACTER AND GROUNDS OF THEIR
NECESSITY AND UNIVERSALITY. SCIENTIFIC DETERMINISM AND PHILOSOPHIC
FATALISM.—By the term _nature_ we have seen that Aristotle and the
scholastics meant the essence or substance of an agent regarded as inner
principle of the latter’s normal activities, as determining the bent or
inclination of these, and therefore as in a real sense their final cause.
Hence Aristotle’s definition of _nature_ as _a certain principle or cause
of the motion and rest of the thing in which that principle is rooted
fundamentally and essentially and not merely accidentally_.( ) The
scholastics, recognizing that this _intentio naturae_, this subjection to
finality, in _unconscious_ agencies must be the work and the index of
intelligence, in other words that this _analogical_ finality in inanimate
things must connote a _proper_ finality, a properly purposive mode of
action, in the author of these things, conceived this _nature_ or
_intentio naturae_ as the impression of a divine art or plan upon the very
being of all creatures by the Creator Himself. Hence St. Thomas’s profound
and well-known description of _nature_ as “_the principle of a divine art
impressed upon things, in virtue of which they move towards determinate
ends_”. Defining _art_ as _the just conception __ of external works to be
accomplished_,( ) he observes that nature is a sort of art: “as if a
ship-builder were to endow his materials with the power of moving and
adapting themselves so as to form or construct a ship”.( ) And elsewhere
he remarks that nature differs from art only in this that the former is an
intrinsic, the latter an extrinsic, principle of the work which is
accomplished through its influence: so that if the art whereby a ship is
constructed were intrinsic to the materials, the ship would be constructed
by nature as it actually is by art.( )

Such, then, is the teleological conception of the nature of each
individual agency in the universe. When we speak of “universal _nature_,”
“external _nature_,” “physical _nature_,” “the course of _nature_,” “the
laws of _nature_,” etc. we are using the term in a collective sense to
signify the sum-total of all the agencies which constitute the whole
physical universe; and furthermore in all such contexts we usually
understand by _nature_ the world of _corporeal_ things as distinct from
the domain of _mind_ or _spirit_.

The proof of this view,—that the agencies of the physical universe are not
merely efficient causes, but that they act under the influence of ends;
that they have definite lines of action which are natural to them, and
whereby they realize their own individual development and the maintenance
of the universe as a _cosmos_; that by doing so they reveal the influence
of _intelligent purpose_,—the proof of this view lies, as we have seen, in
the fact that their activities are regular, uniform, and mutually useful,
or, in other words, that they are productive of _order_ ( ). Bearing
this in mind let us inquire into the various meanings discernible in the
very familiar expressions, “laws of nature,” “physical laws,” “natural
laws”.( )

We may understand firstly by a law of nature this innate tendency we have
been describing as impressed upon the very being of all created things by
the Creator. It is in this sense we speak of a thing acting “naturally,”
or “according to the _law_ of its nature,” or “according to its nature,”
when we see it acting according to what we conceive to be the end intended
for it, acting in a manner conducive to the development of its own
individuality, the preservation of its specific type or kind, and the
fulfilment of its rôle in the general scheme of things. What this
“natural” mode of action is for this particular kind of thing, we gather
from our experience of the regular or normal activity of things of its
kind. Thus, we say it is a _law_ of oxygen and hydrogen to combine in
definite proportions, under suitable conditions, to form water; a _law_ of
all particles of matter in the universe to tend to move towards one
another with a definite acceleration; a _law_ of living organisms to
reproduce their kind. This usage comes nearest to the original meaning of
the term _law_: a precept or command imposed on intelligent agents by a
superior. For we conceive this natural tendency impressed on physical
agencies by the Creator after the analogy of a precept or command. And we
have good reason to do so: because _uniformity of conduct_ in intelligent
agents is the normal result of their obedience to a law imposed upon them;
and we see in the activities of the physical universe an _all-pervading
feature of regularity_.

Secondly, we transfer the term _law_ to _this result itself_ of the
natural tendency of the being, of the convergence of its activities
towards its end. That is to say, we call _the uniform mode of action_ of
an agent a _law of nature_, a _natural_ or _physical law_. This usage,
which is common in the positive sciences, implies a less profound, a more
superficial, but a perfectly legitimate mode of apprehending and studying
the changes and phenomena of the physical universe.

Thirdly, since the several agencies of the universe co-exist in time and
space, since they constantly interact on one another, since for the
exercise of the natural activities of each _certain extrinsic conditions
of relationship with its environment_ must be fulfilled, an accurate
knowledge and exact formulation of these relations are obviously requisite
for a scientific and practical insight into the mode of activity of any
natural agency. In fact the physical scientist may and does take for
granted the natural tendency and the uniformity of action resulting
therefrom, and confines himself to _discovering and formulating the
relations between any given kind of action and the extrinsic conditions
requisite for its exercise_. Such, for instance, would be any chemical
“law” setting forth the measure, and the conditions of temperature,
pressure, etc., in which certain chemical elements combine to form a
certain chemical compound. To all such formulae scientists give the title
of _physical laws_, or _laws of physical nature_. These formulae,
descriptive of the manner in which a phenomenon takes place, setting forth
with the greatest possible quantitative exactness the phenomenal
factors( ) that enter into and precede and accompany it, are laws in a
still more superficial and still less philosophical sense, but a sense
which is most commonly—and justly—accepted in the positive or physical
sciences.


    Before examining the feature and characteristic of _necessity and
    universality_ which enters into all these various conceptions of a
    “physical law” we have here to observe that it would make for
    clearness, and for a better understanding between physics and
    metaphysics, between science and philosophy, between the
    investigator who seeks by observation and experiment for the
    proximate phenomenal conditions and “physical” causes of
    phenomena, and the investigator who seeks for the ultimate real
    ground and explanation of these latter by speculative analysis of
    them, and by reasoning from the scientist’s discoveries about
    them,—if it were understood and agreed that investigation into the
    scope and significance and ultimate ground of this feature of
    stability in the laws of physical nature belongs to the
    philosopher rather than to the scientist. We have already called
    attention to the fact that the propriety of such an obviously
    reasonable and intelligible division of labour is almost
    universally admitted in theory both by scientists and by
    philosophers; though, unfortunately, it is not always remembered
    in practice ( ).

    In theory the scientist assumes, and very properly assumes, that
    the agencies with which he deals are not capricious, unreliable,
    irregular, but stable, reliable, regular in their mode of action,
    that in similar sets of conditions and circumstances they will act
    uniformly. Without inquiring into the ultimate grounds of this
    assumption he premises that all his conclusions, all his inductive
    generalizations about the activity of these agencies, will hold
    good of these latter just in so far as they do act according to
    his general postulate as to their regularity. He then proceeds, by
    the inductive processes of hypothesis and experimental
    verification, to determine what agencies produce such or such an
    event, under what conditions they bring this about, what are all
    the phenomenal conditions, positive and negative, antecedent and
    concomitant, in the absence of any one of which this event will
    not happen, and in the presence of all of which it will happen.
    These are, in accordance with his assumption, _determining_ causes
    of the event; the knowledge of them is from the speculative point
    of view extremely important, and from the practical standpoint of
    invention and applied science extremely useful. As a scientist he
    has no other knowledge in view: he aims at discovering the “how,”
    the _quomodo_, of natural phenomena,—how, for instance, under what
    conditions and in what measure, water is produced from oxygen and
    hydrogen. When he has discovered all these positive and negative
    conditions his _scientific_ knowledge of the formation of water is
    complete.

    But there are other questions in regard to natural phenomena to
    which the experimental methods of the positive sciences can offer
    no reply. They can tell us nothing about the _wider_ “how” which
    resolves itself into a “why.” They can give no information about
    the ultimate causes, origins, reasons, or essences, of those
    phenomena. As Pasteur and other equally illustrious scientists
    have proclaimed, experimental science is essentially positive,
    _i.e._ confined to the proximate phenomenal conditions and causes
    of things; it has nothing to say, nor has it any need or any right
    to say anything, about the ultimate nature, or first origin, or
    final destiny, of the things and events of the universe.

    Yet such questions arise, and clamour insistently for solution.
    _How_ is it, or _why_ is it, that natural phenomena are uniformly
    linked to certain other phenomenal antecedents or “physical”
    causes? Is it absolutely impossible, inconceivable, that this
    sequence should be found not to obtain in even a single individual
    instance? Why should there be such uniform “sequences” or “laws”
    at all? Are there exceptions, or can there be exceptions to these
    “laws of physical nature”? What is the character and what are the
    grounds of the _necessity_ of these laws? Every living organism
    comes from a living cell—not from _any_ living cell, but from
    _some particular kind_ of living cell. But _why_ are there such
    kinds of cells? Why are there living cells at all? Whence their
    first origin? Again, granted that there are different kinds or
    types of living cells, _why_ should a particular kind of cell give
    rise, by division and evolution, to an organism of the same kind
    or type as the parent organisms? Why does it not _always_ do so?
    Why are what biologists describe as “monsters” in the organic
    kingdom possible? And why, since they are possible, are they not
    as numerous as what are recognized as the normal types or kinds of
    living organisms?

    Now these are questions in regard to which not only every
    professing physical scientist and every professing metaphysician,
    but every thinking man, _must_ take up some attitude or other. A
    refusal to consider them, on the plea that they are insoluble, is
    just as definite an attitude as any other; nor by assuming this
    attitude does any man, even though he be a specialist in some
    department of the positive or physical sciences, escape being a
    “metaphysician” or a “philosopher,” however much he may deprecate
    such titles; for he is taking up a reasoned attitude—we presume it
    is such, and not the outcome of mere prejudice—on ultimate
    questions. And this is philosophy; this is metaphysics. When,
    therefore, a physical scientist either avows or insinuates that
    _because_ the methods of physical science, which are suitable for
    the discovery of the _proximate_ causes of phenomena, can tell him
    nothing about _ultimate_ questions concerning these phenomena,
    _therefore_ there is nothing to be known about these questions, he
    is not only committing himself, _nolens volens_, to definite
    philosophical views, but he is doing a serious disservice to
    physical science itself by misconceiving and mis-stating its
    rightful scope and limits. He has just an equal right with any
    other man to utilize the established truths of physical science to
    help him in answering ultimate questions. Nay, he may even use the
    unverified hypotheses and systematic conceptions( ) of physical
    science for what they are worth in helping him to determine his
    general world-view. But his competence as a specialist in physical
    science does not confer upon him any _special_ qualification for
    estimating the value of these truths and hypotheses as evidence in
    the domain of ultimate problems. Nor can he, because he is a
    scientist, or even because he may go so far as to assert the right
    of speaking in the name of “science,” claim for his particular
    interpretation the privilege of exemption from criticism; and this
    is true no matter what his interpretation may be—whether it be
    agnosticism, mechanism, teleologism, monism, or theism. These
    observations may appear elementary and obvious; but the
    insinuation of positivism and phenomenism, that whatever is not
    itself phenomenal and verifiable by the experimental methods of
    the physical sciences is in no wise knowable, and the insinuation
    of mechanists that their world-view is the only one compatible
    with the truths of science and therefore the only “scientific”
    philosophy, justify us in reiterating and emphasizing even such
    obvious methodological considerations. Bearing them in mind, let
    us now examine the uniformity and necessity of the laws of
    physical nature.


Understanding by natural law the natural inclination or tendency of the
creature to a definite line of activity, this law is of itself determining
or necessitating. Moreover, it is absolutely inseparable from the essence
of the creature. Granted that the creature exists, it has this tendency to
exert and direct all its forces and energies in a definite, normal way,
for the realization of its end. This _nisus naturae_ is never absent; it
is observable even where, as in the generation of “monsters” by living
organisms, it partially fails to attain its end. A law of nature, taken in
this sense, is absolutely necessary to, and inseparable from, the created
agent; it admits of no exceptions; no agent can exist without it; for it
is identical with the very being of the agent

But the uniformity of action resulting from this natural tendency, the
uniform series of normal operations whereby it realizes its end, is not
absolutely necessary, inviolable, unexceptional. In the first place the
Author of Nature can, for a higher or moral purpose, prevent any created
agency supernaturally, miraculously, from actually exercising its active
powers in accordance with its nature for the prosecution of its natural
end. But apart altogether from this, abstracting from all special
interference of the First Cause, and confining our attention to the
natural order itself, we have to consider that for any physical agency to
act in its natural or normal manner certain extrinsic conditions are
always requisite: oxygen and hydrogen, for instance, will combine to
produce water, but only under certain conditions of contact, pressure,
temperature, etc. This general requirement arises from the fact already
mentioned, that physical agencies co-exist in time and space and are
constantly interacting. These extrinsic conditions are, of course, not
expressly stated in the formulation of those uniformities and quantitative
descriptions called “laws of nature” in the second and third
interpretations of this expression as explained above. It is taken as
understood that the law applies only if and when and where all such
conditions are verified. The law, therefore, as stated categorically, does
not express an absolutely necessary, universal, and unexceptional truth.
It may admit of exceptions.

In the next place, when we come to examine these exceptions to uniformity,
these failures or frustrations of the normal or natural activities of
physical agencies, we find it possible to distinguish roughly, with
Aristotle, between two groups of such “uniformities” or “laws”. There are
firstly those which, so far as our experience goes, seem to prevail
_always_ (ἀεὶ), unexceptionally; and secondly, those which seem to prevail
_generally_, _for the most part_ (ἐπὶ τὸ πολὺ), though not
unexceptionally. The former would be the outcome of active powers,
energies, forces, _de facto_ present and prevalent always and everywhere
in all physical agencies, and of such a character that the conditions
requisite for their actual operation would be always verified. Such, for
instance, would be the force of gravity in all ponderable matter; and
hence the law of gravitation is regarded as all-pervading, universal,
unexceptional. But there are other natural or normal effects which are the
outcome of powers, forces, energies, not all-pervading, but restricted to
special groups of agencies, dependent for their actual production on the
presence of a great and complex variety of extrinsic conditions, and
liable therefore to be impeded by the interfering action of numerous other
natural agencies. Such, for instance, would be the natural powers and
processes whereby living organisms propagate their kind. The law,
therefore, which states it to be a uniformity of nature that living
organisms reproduce offspring similar to themselves in kind, is a general
law, admitting exceptions.

Operations and effects which follow from the nature of their causes are
called natural (καθ᾽ ἁυτό, καὶ μὴ κατὰ συμβεβηκός).( ) Some causes
produce their natural effects _always_ (τὰ ἐξ ἀνάνκης καὶ ἀεὶ γιγνομένα),
others produce their natural effects _usually_, _as a general rule_ (τὰ ὡς
ἐπι πολὺ γιγνόμενα).( ) Operations and effects which are produced by the
interfering influence of extrinsic agencies (τὸ βίαιον “violent,” as
opposed to natural), and not in accordance with the nature of their
principal cause, are called by Aristotle _accidental_ (τὰ κατὰ συμβεβηκός,
τὰ ἐνδεχόμενα γυγνέσθαι); and these, he remarks, people commonly describe
as due to chance (καὶ ταῦτα πάντες φασὶν εἰναι ἀπο τύχης).( )

All are familiar with events or happenings described as “fortuitous,”
“accidental,” “exceptional,” “unexpected,” with things happening by
“chance,” by (good or bad) “luck” or “fortune”.( ) There are terms in
all languages expressive of this experience—_casus_, _sors_, _fortuna_,
τύχη, etc. The notion underlying all of them is that of something
occurring unintentionally, _praeter intentionem agentis_. Whether chance
effects result from the action of intelligent agents or from the operation
of physical causes they are not “intended,”—by the deliberate purpose of
the intelligent agent in the one case, or by the natural tendency, the
_intentio naturae_, of the mere physical agency in the other. Such an
effect, therefore, has not a _natural_ cause; hence it is considered
_exceptional_, and is always more or less unexpected. _Nature_, as
Aristotle rightly observes,( ) never produces a chance effect. His
meaning is, that whenever such an effect occurs it is not brought about in
accordance with the natural tendency of any physical agency. It results
from a collision or coincidence of two or more such agencies, each acting
according to its nature. The hunter’s act of firing at a wild fowl is an
intentional act. The boy’s act of coming into the thicket to gather wild
flowers is an intentional act. The accidental shooting of the boy is the
result of a coincidence of the two intentional acts. Similarly, each of
all the various agencies which bring about the development of an embryo in
the maternal womb has its own immediate and particular natural effect, and
only mediately contributes to the general effect of bringing the embryo to
maturity. As a rule these particular effects are favourable to the general
effect. But sometimes the immediate ends do not subserve this ulterior
purpose. The result is accidental, exceptional, a deviation from the
normal type, an anomaly, a “monster” in the domain of living organisms.

Aristotle’s analysis, correct so far, is incomplete. It assigns no
ultimate explanation of the fact that there are such encounters of
individual natural tendencies in the universe, such failures in the
subordination of particular ends to wider ulterior ends. As a matter of
fact these chance effects, although not “intended” by the natures of
individual created agencies, are not wholly and entirely unintended. They
are not wholly aimless. They enter into the general plan and scheme of
things as known and willed by the Author of Nature. They are known to His
Intelligence, and willed and ruled by His Providence. For Him there can be
no such thing as chance. Effects that are accidental in relation to
created causes, effects that run counter to the nature or _intentio
naturae_ of these, are foreseen and willed by Him and made to subserve
that wider and more general end which is the universal order of the world
that He has actually willed to create. It is only in relation to the
natures of individual agencies, and to the limited horizon of our finite
intelligences, that such phenomena can present the aspect of fortuitous or
chance occurrences.

Before passing on to deal, in our concluding section, with the great fact
of order, let us briefly compare with the foregoing explanation of nature
and its laws the attempt of mechanists to explain these without
recognizing in the physical universe any influence of final causes, or any
indication of a purposive intelligence. We have ventured to describe their
attitude as philosophic fatalism.( ) According to their view there is no
ground for the distinction between phenomena that happen “naturally” and
phenomena that happen “accidentally” or “by chance”. All alike happen by
the same kind of general necessity: the generation of a “monster” is as
“natural” as the generation of normal offspring; the former, when it
occurs, is just as inevitably the outcome of the physical forces at work
in the particular case as the latter is the outcome of the particular set
of efficient causes which do actually produce the normal result: the only
difference is that the former, occurring less frequently and as the result
of a rarer and less known conjunction of “physical” causes than the
latter, is not expected by us to occur, and is consequently regarded, when
it does occur, as exceptional. Now it is quite true that what we call
“chance” effects, or “exceptional” effects, result just as inevitably from
the set of forces operative in their case, as normal effects result from
the forces operative in theirs. But this leaves for explanation something
which the mechanist cannot explain. He regards a physical law merely as a
generalization, beyond experience, of some experienced uniformity; and he
holds that all our physical laws are provisional in the sense that a wider
and deeper knowledge of the actual conditions of interaction among the
physical forces of the universe would enable us to eliminate
exceptions—which are all apparent, not real—by restating our laws in such
a comprehensive way as to include all such cases. We may, indeed, admit
that our physical laws are open to revision and restatement in this sense,
and are _de facto_ often modified in this sense by the progress of
science. But the important point is this, that the mechanist does not
admit the existence, in physical agencies, of any law in the sense of a
_natural inclination towards an end_, or in any sense in which it would
imply intelligence, design, or purpose. On the contrary, claiming as he
does that all physical phenomena are _reducible to mechanical motions of
inert masses, atoms, or particles of matter in space_, he is obliged to
regard all physical agencies as being, so far as their nature is
concerned, wholly _indifferent_ to any particular form of activity.( )
Committed to the indefensible view that all qualitative change is
reducible to quantitative ( ), and all material differences to
differences in the location of material particles and in the velocity and
direction of the spatial motion impressed upon each by others extrinsic to
itself, he has left himself no factors wherewith to explain the actual
order and course of the universe, other than the purely _indifferent_
factors of essentially or naturally homogeneous particles of inert matter
endowed with local motion. We emphasize this feature of indifference; for
the conception of an inert particle of matter subject to mechanical motion
impressed upon it from without, is the very type of an indifferent agency.
What such an entity will do, whether or not it will move, with what
velocity and in what direction it will move—in a word, its entire conduct,
its rôle in the universe, the sum-total of its functions—nothing of all
this is dependent on itself; everything depends on agencies extrinsic to
it, and on its extrinsic time-and-space relations to these agencies; and
these latter in turn are in the same condition as itself. Now is it
conceivable that agencies of this kind, of themselves absolutely
indifferent to any particular kind of effect, suitable or unsuitable,
regular or irregular, orderly or disorderly, could actually produce and
maintain the existing order of the universe? If they were themselves
_produced by an All-Wise and All-Powerful Being_, and _definitely
arranged_ in spatial relations to one another, and _initial mechanical
motion in definite directions and velocities_ impressed on the different
parts of the system, there is no denying that Infinite Wisdom and Power
could, by Divine concurrence even with such indifferent agencies, realize
and maintain a _cosmos_, or _orderly_ universe. Such _purely extrinsic
finality_ ( ) could, absolutely speaking, account for the existence of
order, uniformity, regularity, system; though all the evidence furnished
by the universe of our actual experience points to the existence of
_intrinsic finality_ also as understood by Aristotle and the scholastics.
But the mechanist will not allow even extrinsic finality; he will not
recognize in the actual universe of our experience any evidence of a
Ruling Intelligence realizing a plan or design for an intelligent purpose;
he denies the necessity of the inference from the data of human experience
to the existence of a Guiding Intelligence. And what are his alternatives?
He may choose one or other of two.

He may restate in the more scientific and imposing terminology of modern
mechanics the crude conception of the ancient Greek atomists: that the
actual order of the universe is the absolutely inevitable and fatal
outcome of a certain collocation of the moving masses of the physical
universe, a collocation favourable to order, a collocation which _just
happened to occur_ by some happy chance from the essentially aimless,
purposeless, indifferent and _chaotic_ motions of those material masses
and particles. We say “chaotic,” for _chaos_ is the absence of _cosmos_;
and _order_ is the fact that has got to be explained. In the concept of
_indifferent, inert_ atoms of matter moving through space there is
emphatically no principle of order;( ) and hence the mechanist who will
not admit the necessity of inferring an Intelligence to give these moving
masses or atoms the collocation _favourable to order_ is forced to
“explain” this supposed collocation by attributing it to pure chance—the
_concursus fortuitus atomorum_ of the ancient Greeks. When, however, we
reflect that the more numerous these atoms and the more varied and complex
their motions, the smaller is the chance of a collocation favourable to
order; that the atoms and motions are supposed actually to surpass any
assignable number; that therefore the chance of any such favourable
collocation occurring is indefinitely smaller than any measurable
proportion,—we can draw our own conclusions about the value of such a
speculation as a rational “explanation” of the existing _cosmos_. And this
apart altogether from the consideration that the fact to be explained is
not merely the _momentary_ occurrence of an orderly collocation, but the
_maintenance_ of an orderly system of cosmic phenomena _throughout the
lapse of all time_. No orderly finite system of mechanical motions
arranged by human skill can preserve its orderly motions indefinitely
without intelligent human supervision: the neglected machine will get out
of order, run down, wear out, if left to itself; and we are asked to
believe that the whole universe is one vast machine which not only goes on
without intelligent supervision, but which actually made itself by
chance!( )

Naturally such an “explanation” of the universe does not commend itself to
any man of serious thought, whatever his difficulties may be against the
argument from the fact of order in the universe to the existence of an
Intelligent Designer. Add to this the consideration that the mechanist
theory does not even claim to account for the first origin of the
universe: it postulates the existence of matter in motion. In regard to
this supreme problem of the _first origin_ of the universe the attitude of
the mechanist is avowedly _agnostic_; and in view of what we have just
remarked about the “chance” theory as an “explanation” of the _existing
order_ of the universe, it is no matter for surprise that most mechanists
reject this theory and embrace the agnostic attitude in regard to this
latter problem also. Whether the agnostic attitude they assume be negative
or positive, _i.e._ whether they are content to say that they themselves
at least fail to find any satisfactory rational explanation of the
_origin_ and _nature_ of the _cosmos_, or contend further that no rational
solution of these problems is within the reach of the human mind, their
teaching is refuted in Natural Theology, where the theistic solution of
these problems is set forth and vindicated.

 . THE ORDER OF THE UNIVERSE; A FACT AND ITS IMPLICATIONS.—The
considerations so far submitted in this chapter, as pointing to the
existence and influence of final causes in the universe, will be
strengthened and completed by a brief analysis of _order_ and its
implications.

We have seen already ( ) that the apprehension of order in things implies
the recognition of _some unifying principle in what is manifold_. What, in
general, is the nature of this principle? It is the _point of view_, the
_standpoint_ from which the unifying arrangement or disposition of the
manifold is carried out; in other words it is the _end_, _object_, or
_purpose_, of the orderly arrangement. The arrangement, and the order
resulting from it, will vary according to the end in view—whether, for
instance, it be an arrangement of books in a library, of pictures in a
gallery, of materials in an edifice, of parts in a machine. Hence St.
Thomas’s definition of order as the due adaptation of means to ends:
_recta ratio rerum ad finem_. When this adaptation is the work of human
intelligence the order realized is _artificial_, when it is the work of
nature the order realized is _natural_. Art is an extrinsic principle of
order, nature implies indeed also an intelligent extrinsic principle of
order, but is itself an intrinsic principle of order: the works of nature
and those of art have this feature in common, that they manifest
adaptation of means to ends.( )

The _subordination_ of means to ends realizes an order which has for its
unifying principle the influence of an _end_, a _final cause_. The group
of _dynamic_ relations thus revealed constitutes what is called
_teleological_ order, the order of _purpose_ or _finality_. The
realization or execution of such an order implies the simultaneous
existence of _co-ordinated_ parts or members in a system, a realized whole
with complex, co-ordinated, orderly parts, the principle of unity in this
system being the _form_ of the whole. This realized, disposed, or
constituted order, is called the _esthetic_ order ( ), the order of
co-ordination, composition, constitution. In ultimate analysis, however,
these two orders, the _teleological_ and the _esthetic_, having as
respective unifying principles the _final_ cause and the _formal_ cause,
are not two really distinct orders, but rather two aspects of one and the
same order: we have seen that in the things of nature the intrinsic end or
final cause of each is identical with its _forma substantialis_ or formal
cause ( ). But the final cause is naturally prior to the formal cause,
and consequently the teleological order is more fundamental than the
esthetic.

St. Augustine’s definition of order as “the arrangement of a multiplicity
of things, similar and dissimilar, according its proper place to
each,”( ) reveals the _material_ cause of order in the multiplicity of
varied elements, the _formal_ cause of order in the group of relations
resulting from the arrangement or _dispositio_, and the _efficient_ cause
of order in the agent that disposes or arranges them. The _final_ cause,
though not directly mentioned, is implied in the fact that the place of
each factor in the system is necessarily determined by the function it has
to fulfil, the part it is suited by its nature to play, in contributing to
the realization of the end or purpose of the arrangement.

If, then, order is _the right arrangement or disposition of things
according to their destination, or in the mutual relations demanded by
their ends_, it necessarily follows that the very existence of _natural_
order in the universe implies that this universe is not a work of _chance_
but a _purposive_ work, just as the existence of _artificial_ order in
products of human art implies that these products are not the result of
chance but of activity influenced by final causes.( )

It is in fact impossible to conceive order except as resulting from the
influence of final causes. Right reason rejects as an utterly inadequate
explanation of the natural order of the universe the fantastic and
far-fetched supposition of a chance collocation of indifferent,
undetermined and aimless physical agencies.( ) If we find in the actual
physical universe difficulties against the view that this universe reveals
the influence of final causes, such difficulties do not arise from the
fact that there is order in the universe, but rather from the fact that
with this order there seems to coexist some degree of disorder also. In so
far forth as there is natural order there is _cogent_ evidence of the
influence of final causes. And so necessary is this inference that even
one single authentic instance of natural order in an otherwise chaotic
universe would oblige us to infer the existence and influence of a final
cause to account for that solitary instance. We mean by an authentic
instance one which evidences a real and sustained uniformity, regularity,
mutual co-ordination and subordination of factors in the behaviour of any
group of natural agencies; for we allow that transient momentary
collocations and concurrences of _indifferent_ agencies, acting aimlessly
and without purpose as a matter of fact, might present to our minds,
accustomed to seek for orderly and purposive phenomena, the deceptive
appearance of order.

Order, then, we take it, necessarily implies the existence and influence
of final causes. This in turn, as we have already observed, implies with
equal necessity the existence of _Intelligent Purpose_. If, then, there is
natural order in the universe, there must exist an _Intelligent Will_ to
account for this natural order.

Leaving the development of this line of argument to its proper place in
Natural Theology, there remains the simple question of fact: Is the
physical universe a _cosmos_? Does it reveal order—a natural order
distinct from the artificial order realized by the human mind in the
mechanical and fine arts, an order, therefore, realized not by the human
mind but by some other mind, by the Divine Mind? The evidences of such
order superabound. We have already referred to some of them ( ), nor is
there any need to labour the matter. Two points, however, in connexion
with this universally recognized fact of order in the universe, call for a
brief mention before we conclude. They are in the nature of difficulties
against the ordinary, reasonable view of the matter, the view on which the
theistic argument from order is based.

In accordance with the Kantian theory of knowledge it is objected that the
order which we apprehend, or think we apprehend, in the universe, is not
_really in_ the universe of our experience, but is as it were _projected
into_ this universe by our own minds in the very process of cognition
itself. It is therefore not real but only apparent, not noumenal but only
phenomenal. It is simply a product of the categorizing, unifying,
systematizing activity of our minds. It is a feature of the phenomenon or
mental product, _i.e._ of the noumenal _datum_ as _invested with a
category of thought_. But whether or not it is a characteristic of the
real universe itself man’s speculative reason is by its very constitution
essentially incapable of ever discovering. The theory of knowledge on
which this difficulty is based can be shown to be unsound and erroneous.
For a criticism of the theory we must refer the reader to scholastic works
on Epistemology. It may be observed, however, apart from the merits or
demerits of the theory, that the experienced fact of order is by no means
demolished or explained away by any questions that may be raised about the
exact _location_ of the fact, if we may so express it. Order is a fact, an
undeniable, experienced fact; and it looms just as large, and cries out
just as insistently for explanation, with whichever of the imposing
adjectives “noumenal” or “phenomenal” a philosopher may choose to qualify
it; nor do we diminish its reality by calling it phenomenal one whit more
than we increase that reality by calling it noumenal.

The other difficulty arises from the existence of _disorder_ in the
universe. Pessimists of the type of Schopenhauer or Nietzsche concentrate
their attention so exclusively on the evidences of disorder, the failures
of adaptation of means to ends, the defects and excesses, the prodigality
and penury, the pain and suffering, which abound in physical nature—not to
speak of moral evil,—that they become blind to all evidences of order, and
proclaim all belief in order an illusion.

The picture of


    Nature, red in tooth and claw
    With ravine( )


is, however, the product of a morbid and distraught imagination rather
than a sane view of the facts. The undeniable existence of disorder, of
physical evils, defects, failures, frustrations of natural tendency in the
universe, does not obscure or conceal from the normal, unbiassed mind the
equally undeniable evidences of a great and wide and generally prevailing
order. Nor does it conceal from such a mind the fact that the existence of
order in any measure or degree implies of necessity the existence of plan
or design, and therefore of intelligent purpose also. Inferring from this
fact of order the existence of a Supreme Intelligence, and inferring by
other lines of reasoning from the data of experience the dependence of the
universe on this Intelligence as Creator, Conserver and Ruler, the theist
is confronted with the reality of moral and physical evil ( ), _i.e._ of
_disorder_ in the universe. But he does not see in this disorder anything
essentially incompatible with his established conclusion that the universe
is a finite creation of Infinite Wisdom, and a free manifestation of the
latter to man. If the actual universe is imperfect, he knows that God
created it freely and might have created a more perfect or a less perfect
one. Knowing that God is All-Powerful as He is All-Wise, he knows that the
actual universe, though imperfect _absolutely_, is perfect _relatively_,
in that it infallibly reveals the Divine Wisdom and Goodness exactly in
the measure in which God has willed to reveal Himself in His works.
Conscious on the one hand that his finite mind cannot trace in detail all
the purposes of God in nature, or assign to all individual events their
divinely appointed ends, he is confident on the other hand that the whole
universe is intelligible only as the working out of a Divine plan, and not
otherwise. To his mind as a theist these lines are a clearer expression of
rationally grounded optimism than they were perhaps even to the poet who
penned them:—


    I trust in nature for the stable laws
    Of beauty and utility. Spring shall plant
    And Autumn garner to the end of time.
    I trust in God—the right shall be the right
    And other than the wrong, while He endures;
    I trust in my own soul, that can perceive
    The outward and the inward, Nature’s good
    And God’s.( )


We have seen that the agencies which constitute the universal order have
each its own inner principle of finality; that these agencies are not
isolated but mutually related in such ways that the ends of each subserve
an extrinsic and remoter end which is none other than this universal order
whereby we recognize the world as a _cosmos_. The maintenance of this
order is the _intrinsic_ end of the universe as a whole: an end which is
_immanent_ in the universe, an end which is of course _a good_. But this
universal order itself is _for an end_, an _extrinsic_, _transcendent_
end, distinct from itself; and this end, too, must be _a good_. “The
universe,” says St. Thomas,( ) “has the good of order and another
distinct good.” The universal order, says Aristotle, has itself an end, a
_good_, which is _one_, and to which all else is ordained: “πρὸς ἕν ἅπαντα
συντέτακται”.( ) What can this Supreme Good be, this absolutely Ultimate
End, this Transcendent Principle of all nature, and of all nature’s
tendencies and activities? Whence comes this universal tendency of all
nature, if not from the Being who is the One, Eternal, Immutable Prime
Mover,( ) and whose moving influence is Love?( ) Such is the profound
thought of Aristotle, a thought re-echoed so sublimely by the immortal
poet of Christian philosophy in the closing line of the _Paradiso_:—


    L’amor che muove il Sole e l’altre stelle.


The immediate factors of the universal order of nature, themselves devoid
of intelligence, must therefore be the work of Intelligent Will. To
arrange these factors as parts of one harmonious whole, as members of one
orderly system, Supreme Wisdom must have conceived the plan and chosen the
means to realize it. The manifestation of God’s glory by the realization
of this plan, such is the ultimate transcendent end of the whole created
universe. “The whole order of the universe,” writes St. Thomas, developing
the thought of Aristotle,( ) “is for the Prime Mover thereof; this order
has for its purpose the working out in an orderly universe of the plan
conceived and willed by the Prime Mover. And hence the Prime Mover is the
principle of this universal order.”

The truths so briefly outlined in this closing chapter on the order and
purpose of the universe have nowhere found more apt and lucid
philosophical formulation than in the monumental writings of the Angel of
the Christian Schools; nor perhaps have they ever elsewhere appeared in a
more felicitous setting of poetic imagery than in these stanzas from the
immortal epic of the Poet of the Christian Schools:—


                ... Le cose tutte quante
    Hann’ ordine tra lora; e questa è forma
    Che l’universo a Dio fa simigliante.

    Qui veggion l’alte creature l’orma
    Dell’eterno Valore, il quale è fine
    Al quale è fatta la toccata norma.

    Nell’ ordine ch’io dico sono accline
    Tutte nature per diverse sorti
    Più al Principio loro e men vicine;

    Onde si muovono a diversi porti
    Per lo gran mar dell’essere, e ciascuna
    Con instinto a lei dato che la porti.

    Questi ne porta il fuoco inver la Luna:
    Questi ne’ cuor mortali è permotore;
    Questi la terra in se stringe ed aduna.

    Nè pur le creature, che son fuore
    D’intelligenza, quest’ arco saetta
    Ma quelle ch’ hanno intelletto ed amore.

    La Providenza, che cotanto assetta,
    Del suo lume fa il ciel sempre quieto,
    Nel qual si volge quel ch’ha maggior fretta:

    Ed ora li, com’ a sito decreto,
    Cen porta la virtù di quella corda,
    Che ciò che scocca drizzo in segno lieto.( )





INDEX.


Absolute, the,   _sq._;
  and relative,   _sqq._

Accidents, individuation of,   _sqq._;
  causes of,  - ;
  divisions of,   _sqq._;
  existence and relation to substance,   _sqq._,   _sqq._,  ,  
              _n._,  ,  .

_Actio et passio_, _v._ causality, causes.

_Actio intentionalis_,  .

_Actio in distans_,  - .

Action, immanent and transitive,  ,  ,  - .

Actual and potential,   _sqq._ and _passim_.

Actuality, goodness and perfection,   _sqq._

_Actus Purus_,  ,  .

AEGIDIUS,   _n._

_Aeveternitas_, _aevum_,  .

Agnosticism,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  .

ALBERTUS MAGNUS,   _n._,   _n._,  .

ALEXANDER OF HALES,   _n._,   _n._

Analogy, analogical predication,   _sqq._,   _n._,  ,  ,  ,  ;
  a. inference,  - ,  .

ANDRONICUS OF RHODES,  .

_Anima mundi_,  .

ANSELM, ST.,   _n._

Anthropology,  .

Appetite,   _sqq._

_Appetitus naturalis_,  - ,  - .

ARISTOTLE, on philosophy,  ;
  on esthetics,  ;
  on theology,  ,  ;
  on special sciences,  ;
  on analogy,  ;
  on change,  ,  ,   _sqq._;
  on essence,  ;
  on individual,  - ;
  on the good,   _sqq._;
  on beauty,   _n._,   _n._;
  on substance and accident,  ,  ;
  on “first” and “second” substances,  - ;
  on quality,  ,  - ;
  on habits,  - ;
  on quantity,   _n._;
  on place,  ;
  on time,  ;
  on relation,   _n._,  - ;
  on principles,   _n._;
  on causes,   _sqq._,  ;
  on final causes,   _sqq._;
  on “nature,”   _sqq._,  - ,  ;
  on order of the universe,  .

Art, and nature,  - .

Arts, fine and mechanical,  ,  ,  ;
  and science,  - ;
  scope of,   _sqq._;
  and morals,  - .

Atomism, _v._ Mechanism.

AUGUSTINE, ST., on basis of possible essences,   _n._,  ;
  on evil,   _n._;
  on beauty,  ,   _n._,   _n._;
  on time,  ;
  on order,  .

AUREOLUS,   _n._

AVERROÏSM,  .

BALMES,   _n._,   _n._,  .

BAÑEZ, D.,   _n._,   _n._

BAUMGARTEN,   _n._

_Beatitudo_,   _n._,  .

Beauty, the Beautiful,  ,  ;
  analysis of,   _sqq._;
  definitions of,   _sqq._

Being, concept analysed,   _sqq._;
  real being and logical being,  ,   _sqq._,  ,  .

— and Ideal Being,   _sqq._,  .

— fundamental distinction in,   _sqq._

— metaphysical grades of,   _sqq._

— potential and actual,   _sqq._

BERGSON,  ,   _n._,  .

BERKELEY,  ,  ,   _n._,  .

BIEL, G.,   _n._

BILLOT,   _n._

Bilocation,  .

BOËTIUS,  .

BOIRAC,  .

BONAVENTURE, ST., on distinction of soul and faculties,  - .

BOSSUET,  ,  .

BROWNING,  .

BRUNETIÈRE,  .

BULLIAT,   _n._

CAJETAN,  ,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._

CAPREOLUS,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._

CARY,   _n._

Categories, ultimate, analysis of,   _sqq._;
  not adequately distinct as modes,  - ,  ;
  but exhaustive,  - .

_Causa exemplaris_,  .

_Causalitas_ “_intentionalis_,”  .

Causality, causes, notion analysed,   _sqq._;
  classification,   _sqq._;
  principle of C.,   _sqq._,  - ;
  “plurality” of causes,  ;
  causality and uniformity,  ,  ,  ;
  “physical” cause,  ,  ;
  phenomenist view of,   _sqq._;
  and inductive science,  ,  ,  ,   _n._;
  and determinism,  ;
  and creation,  ,  - .

Causality, efficient, as index of real distinction,  ;
  classification of efficient causes,   _sqq._;
  instrumental,  - ;
  objective validity of concept,   _sqq._;
  origin of concept,   _sqq._;
  analysis of,   _sqq._,   _sqq._;
  erroneous theories of,  - ;
  and occasionalism,   _sqq._,   _sqq._

— final (_v._ purpose),  ,  ;
  intrinsic and extrinsic finality,   _sqq._,  ;
  all-pervading influence of,  ;
  divisions of,   _sqq._;
  analysis of,  _sqq._;
  as implying intelligence,  ,  - ,  .

— formal,  ,  - .

— material,  ,  - .

Chance,   _sqq._

Change,   _sqq._,  - ;
  and time,  ;
  and causality,  ,  - .

CICERO,  .

CLARKE,  .

_Cognitio_ “_vulgaris_,”  .

Composition, logical and metaphysical,  ;
  essential and integral,  ,  - ;
  as index of finiteness,  .

COMTE,  ,  .

Conceptualism,  ,  .

_Concursus Divinus_, ,  ,  ,   _n._,   _sqq._;
  necessity of,  - ,  - .

Condition, and cause,  - ,  .

Consciousness, and personality,  ,   _sqq._;
  “subliminal,”   sqq.

Constitutive or constructive factors in thought,  ,  ,  ,  - .

Contingent and necessary Being,  .

Co-operation, in philosophical studies,  .

Correlatives,  .

_Corruptio et generatio_,  ,  .

Cosmology,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  .

COUSIN,  ,  .

_Creatio ab aeterno_,  ,  .

Criteriology, _v._ Knowledge, theory of.

DANTE,   n.

DAVID OF DINANT,   _n._

DE MUNNYNCK,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._

DE SAN,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._

DESCARTES, on basis of essences,  ,  ;
  on substance,  ,  - ,  ,   _n._;
  on accidents,  ;
  on corporeal substance,  - ,  ,  .

Design, _v._ purpose and final cause.

DE WULF,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._,  .

Disposition, _v._ habit.

_Dispositiones ad formam_,   n.

Disorder, fact of,  - .

Distinctions, doctrine of,   _sqq._,   _sqq._,  - ,  - ,  - .

DOMET DE VORGES,   _n._

“Double law” in man,  .

“Double personality,”  - .

DRISCOLL,   _n._

DUPASQUIER,   _n._

DURANDUS,   _n._

Duration,  ,   _n._,   _sqq._

Education, and habits,  .

Efficiency, concept of, _v._ cause (efficient).

Ego, _v._ person.

ELEATICS,  ,  ,  .

End (_v._ purpose),  .

Energies, equivalence of,  .

_Ens a se_, _ab alio_,  ;
  and _ens in se_,  - ,  .

_Ens rationis_, _v._ Being.

Entitative habit,   _n._

Epistemology, _v._ Knowledge, theory of.

_Esse_ “_intentionale_,”  ,  ,  .

Essence, analysis of,   _sqq._;
  and nature and substance,  ,  .

Esthetics,  ,  ,   sqq.

Eternity,   _sqq._;
  of essences,   _sqq._

Ether, hypothesis of,  ,  .

Ethics,  - ,  - ,  - .

Eucharist, and substance and accidents,   _n._,  ,   _n._;
  and quantity,  - ;   _n._,  ,   _n._

EUCKEN,  .

Evil, analysis of,   _sqq._

Exemplarism,  ,  ,  - .

Existence, and essence,  - ;
  of accidents,  - ;
  and subsistence,  ,  ;
  and action,  .

Extension, _v._ quantity.

Extrinsic denominations,  ,  .

Faculties,   _sqq._;
  and substance,   _sqq._

Faith and reason,  .

Fatalism,   _n._

Figure, or form, as indicative of nature,  - .

_Finis_, finality, _v._ purpose and final causes.

Finite and Infinite,  ,  - .

FONSECA,   n.

“_Forma_” as essence or nature,  - ,  .

_Formae subsistentes_,  .

“Formal” unity,  .

_Formalitates_,  .

Formative principles, simplicity of,  - ;
  plurality in the individual,   (_n._  ).

FRANCIS OF VITTORIA,   _n._

FRANZELIN,   _n._,   _n._

Free causes,  - ;
  and occasionalism,  .

Freedom of thought,  .

_Generatio_, _v._ _corruptio_.

Genuensis,   _n._

“_Genus_” and “_differentia_” as “_materia_” and “_forma_,”   _n._,  
            (_n._  ).

GEULINCX,  .

GIOBERTI,  .

Good, analysis of the,   _sqq._;
  divisions of the,   _sqq._;
  and being,   _sqq._;
  and beauty,  .

GOUDIN,   _n._

Graceful, elegant, the,   _n._

GREGORY OF VALENTIA,   _n._

Habit, analysis of,   _sqq._

_Haecceitas_,  ,  .

HARPER,   _n._

HEGEL, Hegelianism,  ,  ,  ,  ,  - ,  ,  ,  .

HENRY OF GHENT,   _n._,   _n._

HERACLITUS,  ,  .

HICKEY,   _n._

HOBBES,  .

HÖFFDING,   _n._

HUME,  ;
  on substance,  ,  ,  ;
  on cause,   _n._,  .

HUNLEY,   _n._

_Hypostasis_,  .

Hypostatic Union,  - .

Idealism,  ,  - ,  ,  ,  .

Identity,   _sqq._;
  and change,  ,  ,  ,  ;
  personal,  ,   _sqq._

Immaterial, positively and negatively,  .

Immensity, Divine,  .

Impenetrability,  ,  .

_Incommutabilia vera_,   _n._

Indiscernibles, identity of,  .

Individuation,  ,   _sqq._,  ,  .

Infinite and Finite,  ;
  and categories,  .

Infinite regress in causation,  .

Inherence, _v._ accident.

_Intentio mentis_,  ,  ,   _n._,  ,  ,  .

“_Intentio naturae_,”   _n._,  ,  .

“Intentional” causality,  .

JAMES,  ;
  on personal identity,  - .

JOHN OF ST. THOMAS,   _n._,   _n._

JOSEPH, on meanings of “cause,”  - .

JOUFFROY,  .

KANT,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  .

KAPPES, M.,   _n._

KLEUTGEN,  ,  ,  ,  ,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._;
  on accidents,  ,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._

KLIMKE,   _n._

Knowledge, relativity of,   _sqq._

—scientific,  .

—theory of,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ;
  and doctrine of distinctions,  - ,  - ;
  and categories of being,   _sqq._,  ,  ;
  and category of relation,   _sqq._,  ;
  and causality,  ;
  and order,  - .

_Lacensis, Philosophia_,  .

LACORDAIRE,   _n._

LADD,  ,  .

LAHOUSSE,   _n._

LAMINNE,   _n._,   _n._

Law, of nature,   _sqq._

LEIBNIZ,  ,   _n._,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  .

LEO XIII,  ,  .

LIBERATORE,   _n._

LITTRÉ,  .

LOCKE, on substance,  ,  ;
  on personality,  - ,  .

Logic,  .

MAHER,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._;
  on consciousness of self,  - ,   _n._;
  on theories of self,  - ,   _n._;
  on perception of time,   _n._,  - ;
  on relativity of knowledge,   _n._;
  on cause,   _n._

MALEBRANCHE,  - .

Manicheism,  ,  - .

MASTRIUS,   _n._

_Materia prima_, Aristotle on,  - .

_Materia signata_,  ,  ,  ,  .

Mathematical unity,  ,  .

Mathematics, philosophy of,  ,  .

Matter, and evil,  .

— divisibility of (_v._ individuation),  ;
  continuity of,  - .

Measurement, relativity of,  - .

Mechanism, mechanical conception of universe,  ,  ,  ,  - ,  ,
             ,  ,  ,  - .

Memory, and personality,  - .

MENDIVE,   _n._

MERCIER, on division of metaphysics,  ;
  on scholasticism,  - ;
  on characteristics of essences,  ,  - ;
  on analogical concept of God,  ;
  on distinction,  ;
  on phenomenism,  ,   _n._,   _n._;
  on faculty and substance,   _n._;
  on interaction,  ;
  on efficient cause,   _n._;
  on occasionalism,   _n._;
  on mechanism,   _n._,   _n._

Metaphor, and analogy,  .

Metaphysics, division of,   _sqq._;
  etymology of,  ,  ;
  scope of,  ,  ,  ;
  and physics, _v._ physics.

MILL,  ,  ,  ,  ;
  on causes,  .

Modal distinction,  ,   _sqq._

Modes, accidental and substantial,  - ,  ,   _sqq._,  ,   _n._,
             - .

MOLINA,   _n._

Monadology, of Leibniz,  .

Monism,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,   _n._,  .  .

Monophysites,  .

Monopsychism,  .

Moral cause,  - .

Morality and art,  - .

Motion (_v._ change), and efficient causality,  - .

Multitude, actually infinite,  - .

Nature and substance,   _sqq._;
  and person,   _sqq._;
  analysis of notion of,   _sqq._

Necessary and Contingent Being,  .

Necessity of essences,   _sqq._

— of physical laws,  - .

NEWMAN, on scope of philosophy,  ,  ;
  on causality,  ,  .

NIETZSCHE,  .

_Nisus naturae_,  .

Nominalism,  .

_Notas individuantes_,  ,  .

NYS,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._

Occasion, and cause,  .

Occasionalism,  ,  ,  ;
  examined,  - .

Ontology,  ,  .

Ontologism,  ,   _n._

Optimism,  - ,  .

Older, static and dynamic,  ,  ;
  and beauty,  ,  ,  ;
  natural and artificial,  ;
  and relation,  ;
  and final cause,  ;
  and formal cause,  ;
  and intelligent purpose,  ,  - ,  .

Panpsychism,  .

Pantheism, _v._ monism.

PAULSEN,  ,  - .

Perfection, analysis of,   _sqq._;
  and beauty,  ;
  grades of,  ,  - ;
  in substances,  ,  ;
  and distinction,   _n._;
  and habit,  ;
  and relation,  .

Person, personality,   _sqq._;
  definition of,  ,   _n._;
  distinction from individual nature,   _sqq._;
  false theories of,   _sqq._;
  “subconscious,”  - .

PESCH,   _n._

Pessimism,  - ,  .

Phenomenism, and substance,   _sqq._,  ;
  substantializes accidents,  ;
  substantializes consciousness,  ,  - ;
  and causality,   _sqq._,  ,  .

Philosophy, notion of,   _sqq._;
  divisions of,   _sqq._;
  and special sciences,  - .

Place, analysis of,   _sqq._

PLATO,  ,  ,  ,  ,   _n._,  .

Pleasure, sensible and esthetic,  - ,  - .

POINCARÉ,   _n._

Positivism,  ,  ,  ,  ,  .

Possible, the,   _sqq._,   _sqq._;
  and intelligible,  ;
  and passive potentiality,  .

_Potentia obediantialis_,  .

Potential, _v._ actual.

Power, operative,  ;
  and passive potentiality,   _sqq._;
  as index of perfection,   _n._;
  classification of,  .

_Praescisio objectiva et formalis_,  ,  - .

Prime mover, necessity of,  - .

Principle, notion of,  - .

_Privatio_,  ,  .

Providence, and chance,  .

Psychology,  ,  .

Purpose, and the good,  ,   _sqq._;
  and perfection,  ;
  and order,  .

PYTHAGORAS,  .

QUALITY, analysis of,   _sqq._;
  divisions of,   _sqq._;
  characteristics of,   _sqq._;
  grades of intensity in,  .

Quantity, and individuation,  ;
  analysis of,   _sqq._;
  and corporeal substance,   _sqq._;
  internal and external,  - ,  .

Rate, notion of,   _n._,   _n._

RADA,   _n._

Realism, moderate,  ,  ,  ,  - ,  .

— extreme,  ,  - .

Reason, and cause,  - .

— “sufficient,”  ,  ,  .

REINSTADLER,   _n._

Relation, analysis of,   _sqq._;
  logical,   _sqq._;
  real,   _sqq._;
  transcendental,  ;
  predicamental,   _sqq._ ;
  reality of the “_esse ad_,”  - .

Relative, the,   _sqq._,   _sqq._

RENOUVIER,  .

Revelation,   _sqq._,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  - ,
             ,   _n._

RICKABY,   _n._

ROSCOE,   _n._

ROYCE,  .

SCHIFFINI,   _n._

Scholasticism,  ,  ;
  on substance,   _sqq._

SCHOPENHAUER,  .

Science, _v._ knowledge.

Sciences, special,  ,  ;
  at Louvain and Maynooth,   _n._

SCOTUS,  ,   _sqq._,  ,  ,  ,  ,   _sqq._,  ,   _n._

Self, consciousness of,   _sqq._ (_v._ person.)

SENECA,   _n._

_Sensibilia propria et communia_, objectivity of,  ;
  _per se et per accidens_,  ,  .

Sensism,  ,   _n._,   _n._

Similarity, and identity,  ,  ;
  and distinction,  .

Simplicity, and quantity,   _n._

_Situs_, category of,  ,   _n._

SOCRATES,  .

Solipsism,  .

SONCINAS,   _n._

SOTO, D. DE,   _n._

Space, analysis of,   _sqq._;
  problems on,  - .

Specialists, scientific, and metaphysics,  - .

_Species expressa_,  ;
  _sensibilis_,  .

SPENCER,  ,  ,  ,  ,  .

SPINOZA, on substance,  - ,  ,  .

Spirits, individuation of,  ,  .

STORCHENAU,   _n._

SUAREZ,  ,  ,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._

Sublime, the,   _n._

_Subsistentia_,  ,   _sqq._ (_v._ person),  - .

Substance, category of, undeniable in thought,  ,  ,  ,  ,  - ;
  reality of,   _sqq._;
  cognoscibility of,   _sqq._,   _sqq._;
  plurality of,  ;
  distinction from accidents,   _sqq._,  - ;
  erroneous notions of,   _sqq._;
  permanence of,  ,  ;
  divisions of,   _sqq._;
  complete and incomplete,   _sqq._;
  corporeal and spiritual,  - ,  - ;
  relation to space,  .

Substantial change,  .

SULLY-PRUDHOMME,   _n._

Supernatural theology,  ,  ,  .

— end,  .

_Suppositum, suppositalitas_, _v._ person, personality.

TAINE,  .

Taste, esthetic,  .

Teleology, _v._ purpose and final cause.

TENNYSON,  ,  .

Theodicy,  .

Theology, natural,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  .

THOMAS, ST., on division of philosophy,  ,  ,  ;
  on analogy,  ;
  on absolute being,  ;
  on action,  ,  ;
  on essences,  ,  ,  ;
  on existence and essences,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._;
  on unity,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._,  ;
  on individuation,   _n._;
  on ontological truth,  - , and falsity,   _n._;
  on the good,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._;
  on evil,   _n._,   _n._;
  on the beautiful,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._;
  on Aristotle’s categories,  ,   _n._;
  on substance and accident,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._,  
              _n._,   _n._,   _n._,  ;
  on essence as nature,  - ;
  on subsistence and personality,   _n._,   _n._,  ;
  on quality,  ,  ,  ;
  on habits,  - ;
  on power and substance,   _sqq._;
  on grades in quality,  - ;
  on quantity and corporeal substance,   _sqq._;
  on body and spirit,  - ;
  on time,  - ;
  on _creatio ab aeterno_,  ;
  on duration,   _n._;
  on relations,  - ,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._,  ,   _n._,  
              _n._,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._;
  on classification of causes,   _n._;
  on material and formal causes,   _n._;
  on action,  - ;
  on instrumental cause,  ;
  on created causes,   _n._,   _n._;
  on occasionalism,   _n._;
  on final causality,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._;
  on nature and art,  ,   _n._;
  on order,  ,   _n._,  .

Thought and imagery,  - .

Time, analysis of,   _sqq._;
  problems on,  .

Tradition,  .

Transcendental and generic notions,  ;
  attributes of being,   _sqq._;
  relations,  .

Transubstantiation,  .

Truth, ontological,   _sqq._

TURNER,   _n._

_Ubi_, category of,  ,  .

Ubiquity, Divine,  .

Uniformity of Nature,  ;
  and law,  ;
  and inductive science,  ;
  degrees of,   _sqq._

Union, substantial and personal,  .

Unity, doctrine of,   _sqq._,  - ;
  “organic” and “mechanical,”  - ,  - ,  ;
  of living individual,  - ,  - ;
  conceptual,  .

Universal and individual (_v._ individuation),  - .

Univocal, _v._ analogical.

URRABURU,  ,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._;
  on modes,   _n._;
  on nature and person,  - ,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._;
  on instrumental causes,   _n._;
  on cause,   _n._

Vacuum, and motion,  .

VALLET,  .

Variety, and beauty,  .

VASQUEZ,   _n._

VEITCH,   _n._

Vital change,  - .

— acts,   _n._

Voluntarism,  - .

Weltanschauung, World-view,  ,  ,  .

WILLIAM OF OCKAM,  .

WINDELBAND,  ,   _n._

WOLFF,  ,  .

WUNDT,  ,  ,   _n._

ZIGLIARA,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._,   _n._






FOOTNOTES


        vols. Longmans,  .

_      Institutions Metaphysica, quas Roma, in Pontificia Universitate
      Gregoriana tradiderat_ P. JOANNES JOSEPHUS URRABURU, S.J. Volumen
      Secundum: _Ontologia_ (Rome,  ).

      French version by SIERP,   vols. Paris, Gaume,  .

_      Ontologie, ou Métaphysique Générale_, par D. MERCIER. Louvain,  me
      édit.,  .

      Τὴν ὀνομαζομένην σοφίαν περὶ τὰ πρῶτα αἴτια καὶ τὰς ὑπολαμβάνουσι
      πάντες.—ARISTOTLE, _Metaph._, I.,  . “Sapientia [philosophia] est
      scientia quae considerat primas et universales causas.”—ST. THOMAS,
      _In Metaph._, I., I.  .

_      Cf._ DE WULF, _Scholasticism Old and New_, pp.  - ,  - ;
      _History of Medieval Philosophy_, pp.  - ; also two articles in
      the _Irish Ecclesiastical Record_ (March and May,  ) on _Thoughts
      on Philosophy and Religion_, and an article in the _Irish
      Theological Quarterly_ (October,  ) on _Philosophy and
      Sectarianism in Belfast University_, by the present writer.

_      Cf._ Encyclical _Aeterni Patris_, on Philosophical Studies, by Pope
      Leo XIII., August  , .

      Introduction, §  .

      As a brief general statement of the matter this is sufficiently
      accurate and will not be misunderstood. Of course the general
      standpoint of ultimate causes and reasons admits within itself some
      variety of aspects. Thus Epistemology and Psychology deal with human
      thought, but under different aspects; Psychology and Ethics deal
      with human volition, but under different aspects, etc.

     “Theoreticus sive speculativis intellectus, in hoc proprie ab
      operativo sive practico distinguitur, quod speculativus habet pro
      fine veritatem quam considerat, practicus autem veritatem
      consideratam ordinat in operationem tamquam in finem; et ideo
      differunt ab invicem fine; finis speculativae est veritas, finis
      operativae sive practicae actio.”—ST. THOMAS, _In lib. Boetii de
      Trinitate_.

     Here is St. Thomas’ exposition and justification of the doctrine in
      the text: “Sapientis est ordinare. Cujus ratio est, quia sapientia
      est potissima perfectio rationis, cujus proprium est cognoscere
      ordinem.... Ordo autem quadrupliciter ad rationem comparatatur. Est
      enim quidam ordo quem ratio non facit, sed solum considerat, sicut
      est ordo rerum naturalium. Alius autem est ordo, quem ratio
      considerando facit in proprio actu, puta cum ordinat conceptus suos
      ad invicem, et signa conceptuum, quae sunt voces significativae.
      Tertius autem est quem ratio considerando facit in operationibus
      voluntatis. Quartus autem est ordo quem ratio considerando facit in
      exterioribus rebus, quarum ipsa est causa, sicut in arca et domo. Et
      quia consideratio rationis per habitum perficitur, secundum hos
      diversos ordines quos proprie ratio considerat, sunt diversae
      scientiae. Nam ad _philosophiam naturalem_ pertinet considerare
      ordinem rerum quem ratio humana considerat sed non facit; ita quod
      sub naturali philosophia comprehendamus _et metaphysicam_. Ordo
      autem quem ratio considerando facit in proprio actu, pertinet ad
      _rationalem philosophiam_, cujus est considerare ordinem partium
      orationis ad invicem et ordinem principiorum ad invicem et ad
      conclusiones. Ordo autem actionum voluntariarum pertinet ad
      considerationem _moralis philosophiae_. Ordo autem quem ratio
      considerando facit in rebus exterioribus constitutis per rationem
      humanam, pertinet ad _artes mechanicas_.”—_In X. Ethic. ad Nichom._,
      i., lect.  .

_     Cf._ _Science of Logic_, i., Introduction, ch. ii. and iii.

     ARISTOTLE and the scholastics distinguished between the domain of
      the practical (πρᾶσσω, πρᾶξις, _agere_, _agibilia_) and the
      operative or productive (ποιεῖν, ποίησις, _facere_, _factibilia_).

_     Cf._ _Science of Logic_, i., §  .

     “Quædam igitur sunt _speculabilium_ quæ dependent a materia secundum
      esse, quia non nisi in materia esse possunt, et hæc distinguuntur
      quia dependent quædam a materia secundum esse et intellectum, sicut
      illa in quorum definitione ponitur materia sensibilis: unde sine
      materia sensibili intelligi non possunt; ut in definitione hominis
      oportet accipere carnem et ossa: et de his est _physica_ sive
      scientia naturalis. Quædam vero sunt quæ, quamvis dependeant a
      materia sensibili secundum esse, non tamen secundum intellectum,
      quia in eorum definitionibus non ponitur materia sensibilis, ut
      linea et numerus: et de his est _mathematica_. Quædam vero sunt
      speculabilia quæ non dependent a materia secundum esse, quia sine
      materia esse possunt: sive nunquam sint in materia, sicut Deus et
      angelus, sive in quibusdam sint in materia et in quibusdam non, ut
      substantia, qualitas, potentia et actus, unum et multa, etc., de
      quibus omnibus est _theologia_, id est scientia divina, quia
      præcipuum cognitorum in ea est Deus. Alio nomine dicitur
      _metaphysica_, id est, transphysica, quia post physicam dicenda
      occurrit nobis, quibus ex sensibilibus competit in insensibilia
      devenire. Dicitur etiam _philosophia prima_, in quantum scientiae
      aliæ ab ea principia sua accipientes eam sequuntur.”—ST. THOMAS, _In
      lib. Boetii de Trinitate_, q.  , a.  .

     Ἐττιν ἐπιστήμη τις ἤ θεωοεῖ τὸ ὄν και τούτῳ ὑπάρχοντα καθ᾽
      ἁυτό.—_Metaph._ III., I (ed. Didot).

_     Metaph._ X., ch. vii.,   and  .

_     Cf._ _Science of Logic_, ii., §§  - .

     When the term “science” is used nowadays in contradistinction to
      “philosophy,” it usually signifies the knowledge embodied in what
      are called the special, or positive, or inductive sciences—a
      knowledge which Aristotle would not regard as strictly or fully
      scientific.

     Aristotle’s conception of the close relation between _Physics_ (or
      the _Philosophy_ of Nature) and those analytic studies which we
      nowadays describe as the physical sciences, bears witness to the
      close alliance which he conceived to exist between sense observation
      on the one hand and rational speculation on the other. This sane
      view of the continuity of human knowledge, a view to which the
      Schoolmen of the Middle Ages were ever faithful, was supplanted at
      the dawn of modern philosophy in the sixteenth and seventeenth
      centuries by the opposite view, which led to a divorce between
      physics and metaphysics, and to a series of misunderstandings which
      still prevail with equal detriment to science and philosophy alike.

_     Cf._ DE WULF, _History of Medieval Philosophy_, pp.  - ,  ;
      MERCIER, _Ontologie_, Introd., p. v., n.

     “Dicitur metaphysica [scientia] id est, transphysica, quia post
      physicam dicenda occurrit nobis, quibus ex sensibilibus competit in
      insensibilia devenire.”—ST. THOMAS, _In Lib. Boetii de Trinitate_,
      q.  , a.  .

     This is also the title of the social and ethnological study of the
      various races of men, their primitive habits, customs, institutions,
      etc.

     Not entirely; for instance, what is perhaps the most comprehensive
      course of philosophy published in recent times, the _Philosophia
      Lacensis_ (  vols., Herder,  - ) apparently follows the
      arrangement of metaphysics outlined above. The fundamental questions
      on _knowing_ and _being_, which usually constitute distinct
      departments under the respective titles of _Epistemology_ and
      _Ontology_, are here treated under the comprehensive title of
      _Institutiones Logicales_ (  vols.). However, they are really
      metaphysical problems, problems of speculative philosophy, wherever
      they be treated; and the fact that the questions usually treated in
      Ontology are here treated in a volume apart (vol. iii. of the
      _Institutiones Logicales_: under the peculiar title of _Logica
      Realis_), and not in the volumes assigned to general metaphysics,
      shows the necessity and convenience of the more modern arrangement.
      General metaphysics are dealt with in   vols. of _Institutiones
      Philosophiae Naturalis_ and   vols. of _Institutiones
      Psychologicae_; special metaphysics in the _Institutiones
      Theodicœae_ (  vol.); ethics in   vols. of _Institutiones Juris
      Naturae_.

_     Cf._ TURNER, _History of Philosophy_, p.  .

     MERCIER, _Logique_, Introd., §  .

     pp.  ,  .

_     Cf._ _Science of Logic_, i., §  .

_     Cf._ _ibid._ i., Introd., ch. i.

     CAJETAN, _In   Post Anal._, ch. xiii.

_     Cf._ MERCIER, _Ontologie_, §§  - ; LADD, _A Theory of Reality_,
      ch. i.

_     infra_, ch. viii.; _Cf._ _Science of Logic_, ii., Part IV., ch.
      iii.-vi.; Part V., ch. i.

     p.  —in which context will be found a masterly analysis and
      criticism of current prejudices and objections against systematic
      metaphysics.

_     ibid._ pp.  - .

     ROYCE, _The Conception of God_, p.  .

     MERCIER, _Logique_, Introd., §  .

     Encyclical, _Aeterni Patris_, on philosophical studies.

_     Summa Theologica_,  , q.  , a.  , ad.  .

_     Cf._ MERCIER, _Origines de la psychologie contemporaine_, ch.
      viii.; DE WULF, _Scholasticism Old and New_ (_passim_).

_     Cf._ LADD, _op. cit._, pp.  ,  .

     EUCKEN, _Gesammelte Aufsaetze zur Philosophie und Lebensanschauung_,
      §   (Leipzig,  ).

_     Cf._ art. _Philosophy and the Sciences at Louvain_, in the _Irish
      Ecclesiastical Record_, May,  , reprinted as Appendix in DE
      WULF’S _Scholasticism Old and New_.

     Hence the necessity of equipping the student of philosophy with a
      knowledge of the main conclusions and theories of the sciences that
      have an immediate bearing on philosophy: chemistry, physics,
      geology, astronomy, mechanics, the axioms and postulates of pure and
      applied mathematics, cellular biology, embryology, the physiology of
      the nervous system, botany and zoology, political economy, sociology
      and ethnology. Nowhere is the system of combining the scientific
      with the philosophical formation of mind more thoroughly carried out
      at the present time than in the curriculum of the Philosophical
      Institute at the University of Louvain. In the College of Maynooth
      not only is the study of philosophy completed by a fuller course of
      Christian Theology,—both disciplines thus combining to give the
      student all the essential elements of a complete _Philosophy of
      Life_ (ii.),—but it is preceded by an elementary training in the
      physical sciences and accompanied by courses on the history of
      scientific theories in chemistry, physics, physiology, and general
      biology.

     “We may mention it in passing,” writes Mercier in his general
      introduction to philosophy (_Logique_, §  , p.  )—“it was this
      feeling of individual impotence in face of the task confronting the
      philosopher at the present day, that inspired the foundation of the
      Philosophical Institute at the University of Louvain”. He had
      previously outlined the project in his _Rapport sur les études
      philosophiques_ at the Congress of Mechlin in  . Here are a few
      brief extracts from that memorable document: “Since individual
      effort feels itself well nigh powerless in the presence of the field
      of observation which goes on widening day by day, association must
      make up for the insufficiency of the isolated worker; men of
      analysis and men of synthesis must come together and form, by their
      daily intercourse and united action, an atmosphere suited to the
      harmonious development of science and philosophy alike....” “Man has
      multiplied his power of vision; he enters the world of the
      infinitely small; he fixes his scrutinizing gaze upon regions where
      our most powerful telescopes discern no limits. Physics and
      Chemistry progress with giant strides in the study of the properties
      of matter and of the combinations of its elements. Geology and
      Astronomy reconstruct the history of the origin and formation of our
      planet. Biology and the natural sciences study the minute structure
      of living organisms, their distribution in space and succession in
      time; and Embryology explores their origin. The archæological,
      philological and social sciences reconstruct the past ages of our
      history and civilizations. What an inexhaustible mine is here to
      exploit, what regions to explore and materials to analyse and
      interpret; finally what pioneers we must engage in the work if we
      are to have a share in garnering those treasures!”

_     Grammar of Assent_, p.  .

     Lucerna pedibus meis verbum tuum, et lumen semitis meis.—Ps.
      cxviii.,  .

     TENNYSON, _In Memoriam_.

_     Cf._ _Logic_, i., §  .

_     Cf._ _Logic_, i., pp.  - .

_     Cf._ SCOTUS, _Summa Theologica_, edit. by Montefortino (Rome,
       ), i., p.  , _Ad tertium_.

_     Cf._ _Logic_, i., pp.  - .

_     Cf._ SCOTUS, _op. cit._, i., pp.  ,  ; also URRABURU,
      _Ontologia_, Disp. III., Cap. II., Art. III., p.  .

     Hence St. Thomas calls the things about which a generic or specific
      concept is predicated “analoga secundum esse et non secundum
      intentionem” (_In   Sent._, Dist. xix., q.  , a.  , ad a am): we
      bring them under the same notion or “intentio” (_e.g._ “living
      being”), but the content of this notion is realized in the various
      things (_e.g._ in Socrates, this horse, that rose-tree, etc.) in
      varying and unequal degrees of perfection. Hence, too, this univocal
      relation of the genus to its subordinate subjects is sometimes
      (improperly) called “analogy of inequality”.

_     Cf._ _infra_, ch. viii.

_     Cf._ KLEUTGEN, _Philosophie der Vorzeit_, §§  ,  .

     This, of course, is the proper sort of analogical predication: the
      predication based upon similarity of proportions or relations.
      Etymologically, analogy means equality of proportions (_Cf._
      _Logic_, ii., p.  ). On the whole subject the student may consult
      with profit Cajetan’s _Opusculum de Nominum Analogia_, published as
      an appendix to vol. iv. of St. Thomas’ _Quæstiones Disputatæ_ in De
      Maria’s edition ( ).

_     Cf._ KLEUTGEN, _op. cit._, §§  - .

_     Cf._ SCOTUS, _op. cit._, i., pp.  - ,  - ,  -  (especially
      p.  , _Ad tertium_); p.  , _Ad sextum_; p.  , _Ad tertium_.

     KLEUTGEN, _op. cit._, §  .

_     ibid._, §  .

     SUAREZ, _Metaph._, Dist. xxviii., §  ; Dist. xxxii., §  .

     SCOTUS, _op. cit._, i., pp.  - ,  - .

_     ibid._, p.  .

_     Cf._ KLEUTGEN, _La philosophie scolastique_ (“_Die Philosophie der
      Vorzeit_”). Fr. trans. by Sierp (Paris,  ), vol. i., p.  , §  .

     The logical copula, which expresses this relation and asserts the
      truth of the judgment, expresses, of course, a logical entity, an
      _ens rationis_. True judgments may be stated about logical entities
      as well as about realities. But since the former can be conceived
      only after the manner of the latter, the appropriateness of using
      the verb which expresses existence or reality, as the logical
      copula, will be at once apparent. _Cf._ _Logic_, i., p.  , n.  .

     SUAREZ, _Metaph._, Dist.  , § i.,  .

_     Cf._ _Logic_, i., pp.  - .

_     Cf._ KLEUTGEN, _op. cit._, §§  - .

_     Cf._ _Logic_, i., pp.  - .

     “Esse actum quondam nominat: non enim dicitur esse aliquid ex hoc,
      quod est in potentia, sed ex hoc, quod est in actu.”—ST. THOMAS,
      _Contra Gent._ i., c. xxii.,  .

     Certain medieval philosophers had made the same mistake. St. Thomas
      points out their error frequently. _Cf._ _Contra Gentes_, i., c.
      xxvi: “Quia id, quod commune est, per additionem specificatur vel
      individuatur, æstimaverunt, divinum esse, cui nulla fit additio, non
      esse aliquid proprium, sed esse commune omnium: non considerantes,
      quod id, quod commune est, vel universale, sine additione esse non
      potest, sed sine additione consideratur. Non enim animal potest esse
      absque rationali vel irrationali differentia, quamvis sine his
      differentiis consideretur; licet enim cogitetur universale absque
      additione, non tamen absque receptibilitate additionis est. Nam si
      animali nulla differentia addi posset, genus non esset; et similiter
      est de omnibus aliis nominibus. Divinum autem esse est absque
      additione, non solum cogitatione, sed etiam in rerum natura; et non
      solum absque additione, sed absque receptibilitate additionis. Unde
      ex hoc ipso quod additionem non recipit, nec recipere potest, magis
      concludi potest quod Deus non sit esse commune, sed esse proprium.
      Etenim ex hoc ipso suum esse ab omnibus aliis distinguitur, quia
      nihil ei addi potest.”

_     Cf._ ST. THOMAS, QQ. DD. _De Potentia_, q. i. art.  , ad.  .

     ARISTOTLE, _Metaph._, c. iv., v., _apud_ KLEUTGEN, _op. cit._, iii.,
      p.  .

_     Contra Gentes_, II., c. vii.

_     Cf._ LAMINNE, _Cause et Effet_—_Revue neo-scolastique_, February,
       , p.  .

     St. Thomas uses what is for him strong language when he describes
      such a view as ridiculous: “Ridiculum est dicere quod ideo corpus
      non agat, quia accidens non transit de subjecto in subjectum; non
      enim hoc modo dicitur corpus calidum calefacere, quod idem numero
      calor, qui est in calefaciente corpore, transeat ad corpus
      calefactum; sed quia virtute caloris, qui est in calefaciente
      corpore, alius calor numero fit actu in corpore calefacto, qui prior
      erat in eo in potentia. Agens enim naturale non est traducens
      propriam formam in alterum subjectum, sed reducens subjectum quod
      patitur de potentia in actum.”—_Contra Gentes_, L. III., c. lxix.

_     Cf._ ZIGLIARA, _Ontologia_ ( ), ix., _Quintum_. _Cf._ also
      ARISTOTLE, _Metaph._ v., ST. THOMAS, _In Metaph._, v., §  , and
      _Contra Gentes_, i., c. xvi., where he emphasizes the truth that
      potential being presupposes actual being: “Quamvis id quod quandoque
      est in potentia, quandoque in actu, prius sit tempore in potentia
      quam in actu, tamen simpliciter actus est prior potentia; quia
      potentia non educit se in actum, sed opportet quod educatur in actum
      per aliquid quod sit in actu. Omne igitur quod est aliquo modo in
      potentia, habet aliquid prius se”.

     KLIMKE, _Der Monismus und seine philosophischen Grundlagen_, p.  .
      _Cf._ _Irish Theological Quarterly_, vol. vii. (April,  ), p.  
      _sqq._, art. _Reflections on Some Forms of Monism_.

     For relations of _potentia_ and _actus_, _cf._ MERCIER, _Ontologie_,
      §  .

_     Cf._ _Physics_, v.,  ; _De Anima_, i.,  .

     Λεγώ δ᾽ ὕλην, ἢ καθ᾽ ἁυτὴν μήτε τὶ, μήτε ποσὸν, μήτε ποίον, μήτε
      ἄλλο μεδὲν λέγεται οἶς ὤρισται τὸ ὄν.—_Metaph._ vi., c. iii.

     “Decepit antiquos philosophos hanc rationem inducentes, ignorantia
      formae substantialis. Non enim adhuc tantum profecerant ut
      intellectus eorum se elevaret ad aliquid quod est supra sensibilia:
      et ideo illas formas tantum consideraverunt, quæ sunt sensibilia
      propria vel communia. Hujusmodi autem manifestum est esse
      accidentia, ut album et nigrum, magnum et parvum, et hujusmodi.
      Forma autem substantialis non est sensibilis nisi per accidens, et
      ideo ad ejus cognitionem non bervenerunt, ut scirent ipsam materiam
      distinguere.”—_In Metaph._ vii.,  .

     “Esse actum quemdam nominat: non enim dicitur esse aliquid, ex hoc
      quod est in potentia, sed ex hoc quod est in actu.”—ST. THOMAS,
      _Contra Gentes_, i., ch. xxii.,  .

     The etymology of Aristotle’s description of the essence as τὸ τί ἦν
      εἶναι is not easy to explain. The expression τὸ εἶναι supposes a
      dative understood, _e.g._ τὸ ἀνθρώπῳ εἶναι, the being proper to man.
      To the question τὶ ἐστι τὸ ἀνθρώπῳ εἶναι; what is the being or
      essence proper to man? the answer is: that which gives the
      definition of man, that which explains what he is—τί ἦν. Is the
      imperfect, τὶ ἦν, an archaic form for the present, τὶ ἐστι; or is it
      a deliberate suggestion of the profound doctrine that the essence as
      ideal, or possible, is anterior to its actual, physical realization?
      Commentators are not agreed. _Cf._ MATTHIAS KAPPES,
      Aristoteles-Lexicon, p.   (Paderborn,  ); MERCIER, _Ontologie_,
      p.   n.

     Essentia est illud per quod res constituitur in proprio genere vel
      specie, et quod significamus per definitionem indicantem quid est
      res.—_De Ente et Essentia_, ch. i.

     ARISTOTLE, _Metaph._, v.,  ; ST. THOMAS, _De Potentia Dei_, q. ix.,
      art.  .

     Sometimes, however, the expression “metaphysical essence” is used to
      signify those objective concepts, and those only, _without which the
      thing cannot be conceived_, (or sometimes, even the one which is
      considered most fundamental among these), and therefore as not
      explicitly involving the concepts of properties which follow
      necessarily from the former; while the “physical essence” is
      understood to signify all those real elements _without which the
      thing cannot actually exist_, including, therefore, all such
      necessary properties. Taken in this sense the physical essence of
      man would include not merely soul and body, but also such properties
      as the capacity of speech, of laughter, of using tools, of cooking
      food, etc.

     Et ex hoc patet ratio, writes St. Thomas, quare genus et species et
      differentia se habeant proportionaliter ad materiam, formam et
      compositum in natura, quamvis non sint idem cum illis; quia neque
      genus est materia, sed sumitur a materia ut significans totum; nec
      differentia est forma, sed sumitur a forma ut significans totum.
      Unde dicimus hominem esse _animal rationale_, et non _ex animali et
      rationali_; sicut dicimus eum esse ex corpore et anima. Ex corpore
      enim et anima dicitur esse homo, sicut ex duabus rebus quædam tertia
      res constituta, quæ neutra illarum est: homo enim nec est anima
      neque corpus; sed si homo aliquo modo ex animali et rationali
      dicatur esse, non erit sicut res tertia ex duabus rebus sed sicut
      intellectus [conceptus] tertius ex duobus intellectibus. Intellectus
      enim _animalis_ est sine determinatione formae specialis naturam
      exprimens rei, ex eo quod est materiale respectu ultimae
      perfectionis. Intellectus autem hujus differentiae, _rationalis_,
      consistit in determinatione formae specialis: ex quibus duobus
      intellectibus constituitur intellectus speciei vel definitionis. Et
      ideo sicut res constituta ex aliquibus non recipit prædicationem
      earum rerum ex quibus constituitur; ita nec intellectus recipit
      prædicationem eorum intellectuum ex quibus constituitur; non enim
      dicimus, quod definitio sit genus vel differentia.—_De Ente et
      Essentia_, cap. iii.

_     Cf._ MERCIER, _Psychologie_, vol. ii., §   ( th edit.,  , pp.
       - ).

_     Cf._ ARISTOTLE, _Metaph._, L. viii.,  ; ST. THOMAS, _In_ viii.,
      _Metaph._, Lect. iii., par. i.

_     Cf._ MERCIER, _Ontologie_, pp.  - . How do we know that not only
      water (H O) is a possible essence but also hydrogen di-oxide (H O )?
      Because the latter substance has been _actually formed_ by chemists
      (_Cf._ ROSCOE, _Elementary Chemistry_, Lesson VI.). Is hydrogen
      tri-oxyde (H O ) a possible substance? We may ask chemists,—and they
      may not be able to tell us with any certainty whether it is or not.

     The actual existence of a thinking mind is of course a necessary
      condition, in the actual order, for the apprehension of objects in
      this abstract way. But such existence is no part of the apprehended
      object. That the human mind, which is itself finite, contingent,
      allied with matter, and dependent on the activity of corporeal sense
      organs for the objects of its knowledge, should nevertheless have
      the power to apprehend contingent realities apart from their
      contingent actual existence in time and space,—is a fact of the
      greatest significance as regards the nature of the mind itself. But
      if we try to prove the existence of God from a consideration of the
      nature and powers of the human mind, our argument proceeds from the
      actual, and is distinct from any argument based exclusively on the
      nature and properties of possible essences as such. St. Augustine’s
      argument assumes as a fact that the human mind represents to itself
      possible essences as having reality independently both of its own
      thought and of any actual existence of such essences (_Cf._ DE
      MUNNYNCK, _Praelectiones de Dei Existentia_, p.  ). But _is_ this a
      fact? This is the really debatable point.

     Among others Henry of GHENT (†  ; _Cf._ DE WULF, _History of
      Medieval Philosophy_, pp.  - ; KLEUTGEN, _Philosophie der
      Vorzeit_, Dissert, vi., cap. ii.,   §§  - ), Capreolus
      ( - ), certain Scotists, and certain theosophists of the
      thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, are credited with this peculiar
      view. For numerous references, _Cf._ URRABURU, _Ontologia_, Disp.
      iii., cap. ii., art. v. pp.  - .

_     Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, pp.  - , for references; among others,
      to ST. THOMAS, _De Potentia_, q.  , art.  , ad  um; art.  , ad  um;
      art.  , argum.  o; _ibid._, ad  um. _Summa Theol._, i., q.  , art.
       ; q.  , art.  ; _ibid._ , art.  , ad  um; q.  , art.  , corp.

     Among others, BALMES (_Fundamental Philosophy_, bk. iv., ch. xxvi.),
      LEPIDI (_Ontologia_, quoted by DE MUNYNCK, _Praelectiones de Dei
      Existentia_, Louvain,  , p.  ); DE MUNYNCK (_ibid._, pp.  - ,
       - ,  ); HICKEY (_Theologia Naturalis_, pp.  - ); DRISCOLL
      (_God_, pp.   sqq.); LACORDAIRE (_God_, p.  ); KLEUTGEN,
      _Philosophie der Vorzeit_, Dissert. iv., §  .

     Truth is not the work of any human intelligence, says St. Augustine,
      nor can any one arrogate to himself the right to say “_my_ truth,”
      or “_thy_ truth,” but all must say simply “_the_ truth”:
      “Quapropter, nullo modo negaveris esse incommutabilem veritatem,
      haec omnia, quae incommutabiliter vera sunt, continentem, quam non
      possis dicere vel tuam vel meam, vel cujuscumque hominis, sed
      omnibus incommutabilia vera cernentibus, tamquam miris modis
      secretum et publicum lumen, praesto esse ac se praebere communiter:
      omne autem quod communiter omnibus ratiocinantibus atque
      intelligentibus praesto est, ad ullius eorum proprie naturam
      pertinere quis dixerit?”—_De Libero Arbitrio_, lib. ii., ch. xii.
      _Cf._ his striking expression of the same thought in his Commentary,
      _Super Genesim ad Litteram_, lib. ii., cap. vii.: “We may conceive
      the heavens and the earth, that were created in six days, ceasing to
      exist; but can we conceive the number ‘six’ ceasing to be the sum of
      six units?”: “Facilius coelum et terra transire possunt, quae
      secundum numerum senarium fabricata sunt, quam effici possit ut
      senarius numerus suis partibus non compleatur” (_apud_ MERCIER,
      _Ontologie_, pp.  - ).

_     Cf._ BALMES (_Fundamental Philosophy_, bk. iv., ch. xxvi.), who,
      analysing the truth of the proposition “Two circles of equal
      diameters are equal,” as an example of the necessary, eternal,
      immutable characteristics of possible essences, goes so far as to
      write (italics ours): “What would happen, if, withdrawing all
      bodies, all sensible representations, _and even all intelligences_,
      we should imagine absolute and universal nothing? We see the truth
      of the proposition even on this supposition: for it is impossible
      for us to hold it to be false. On every supposition, our
      understanding sees a connection which it cannot destroy: the
      condition once established, the result will infallibly follow.

      “An absolutely necessary connection, founded neither on us, nor on
      the external world, which exists before anything we can imagine, and
      subsists after we have annihilated all by an effort of our
      understanding, must be based upon something, it cannot have nothing
      for its origin: to say this would be to assert a necessary fact
      without a sufficient reason.

      “It is true that in the proposition now before us nothing real is
      affirmed, but if we reflect carefully we find even here the greatest
      difficulty for those who deny a real foundation to pure possibility.
      What is remarkable in this phenomenon, is precisely this, that our
      understanding feels itself forced to give its assent to a
      proposition which affirms an absolutely necessary connection
      _without any relation to an existing object_. It is conceivable that
      an intelligence affected by other beings may know their nature and
      relations; but it is not so easy of comprehension how it can
      discover their nature and relations in an absolutely necessary
      manner, when it abstracts all existence, when the ground upon which
      the eyes of the understanding are fixed, is the abyss of nothing.

      “We deceive ourselves when we imagine it possible to abstract all
      existence. Even when we suppose our mind to have lost sight of every
      thing, a very easy supposition, granting that we find in our
      consciousness the contingency of our being, the understanding still
      perceives a possible order, and imagines it to be all occupied with
      pure possibility, _independent of a being upon which it is based_.
      We repeat, that this is an illusion, which disappears so soon as we
      reflect upon it. In pure nothing, nothing is possible; there are no
      relations, no connections of any kind; in nothing there are no
      combinations, it is a ground upon which nothing can be pictured.

      “The objectivity of our ideas and the perception of necessary
      relations in a possible order, reveal _a communication of our
      understanding with a being on which is founded all possibility_.
      This possibility can be explained on no supposition except that
      which makes the communication consist in _the action of God giving
      to our mind faculties_ perceptive of the necessary relation of
      certain ideas, based upon necessary being, and representative of His
      infinite essence.”

      Balmes, therefore, does not mean that we could continue to see
      essences as possible were we to imagine withdrawn not merely finite
      minds but even the Divine Mind. In such an absurd hypothesis,
      nothing would appear true or false, possible or impossible. But he
      contends that even when we _try_ to think away _all_ minds, even the
      Divine Mind, we still see possible essences to be possible. And from
      this he argues that, since we have successfully thought away finite
      minds and the actuality of essences, while the possibility of these
      latter still persists, these must be grounded in the Mind of God,
      the Actual, Eternal, Necessary Being, where they have eternal ideal
      being.

      _Cf._ DE MUNNYNCK (_op. cit._, pp.  - ): “Ponamus mundum non esse,
      nec supponamus Dei existentiam. In nihilo illo, omne ens actuale
      excludens, remanet intacta—hoc certissime scimus ex objectivo valore
      intellectus nostri—realitas aeterna, immutabilis, ordinis idealis.
      [Illa realitas essentiarum, he adds (_ibid._, n.  ), independens ab
      omni actuali existentia, atque ab omni actu intellectus, est
      fundamentum metaphysicum realismi platonici.—Habet praeterea mirum
      hoc systema, ut omnes sciunt, fundamentum criteriologicum.]
      Essentiae _sunt_, nec tamen existunt. Illa realitas, praeter mundum
      totum, praeter entia rationis, indestructibilis perseverat, nec
      tamen actualis est. Haec quomodo intelligi possit nescimus, nisi
      ponatur illam fundari in plenitudine aeterna, infinita, absoluta τοῦ
      Esse absoluti. Hoc ente supremo posito, omnia lucidissima se
      praebent intellectui; illo Deo optimo—quem non possumus, perspectis
      illis altissimis, non adorare—sublato, admittendae sunt essentiae
      rerum ab aeterno reales sine actuali existentia; atque proinde quid
      non-individuale est reale in se, quod tamen concipi non potest nisi
      objective in mente.”

_     Cf._ ST. AUGUSTINE, _De Libero Arbitrio_, lib. ii., ch. viii.

_     Cf._ especially MERCIER, _Ontologie_, pp.  - .

    It is, for example, just as necessarily and immutably true of any
      actually existing man that he cannot be at the same time existing
      and not existing as it is that a man cannot be an irrational animal.

    “Unde, etiamsi intellectus humanus non esset, adhuc res dicerentur
      verae in ordine ad intellectum divinum. Sed si uterque intellectus,
      quod est impossibile, intelligeretur auferri, nullo modo ratio
      veritatis remaneret.”—ST. THOMAS, _De Veritate_, q. i., art. ii.

_    Phædo_,  , C. ff.

    MERCIER, _Ontologie_, pp.  - .

_    Cf_. DE MUNNYNCK, _op. cit._, pp.  - .

_    Cf._ DE MUNNYNCK, _op. cit._, pp.  - .

_    ibid._, pp.  ,  .

    “Quæ objecta non divina esse, luce clarius apparet. Attamen ilia
      ponderando, _modumque inspiciendo quo representantur a mente
      humana_, atque praesupponendo valorem objectivum intellectus,
      concludimus ex ideis ad realitates illas quæ in Esse divino
      fundantur ... ratione horum [objectorum _scil._ idearum nostrarum]
      percipimus, ope ratiocinii, illa positive aeterna et immutabilia,
      quæ reapse in Deitate fundantur, atque sunt ipse Deus quatenus
      imitabilis.”—_ibid._, pp.  - . _Cf._ extract quoted above, p.   n.

    “Non ideo voluit Deus mundum creare in tempore, quia vidit melius
      sic fore, quam si creasset ab æterno; _nec voluit tres angulos
      trianguli æquales esse duobus rectis, quia cognovit aliter fieri non
      posse_. Sed contra, quia voluit creare mundum in tempore, ideo sic
      melius est, quam si creatus fuisset ab æterno, _et quia voluit tres
      angulos trianguli necessario æquales esse duobus rectis, idcirco jam
      verum est, et aliter fieri non potest_, atque ita de
      reliquis.”—DESCARTES, in _Resp. ad Sext. Objectiones_, ad  um
      scrupulum.

    MERCIER, _op. cit._, pp.  - .

    URRABURU (_op. cit._ Disp. iii., cap. ii., § iii., p.  ) mentions
      Wolff, Leibniz, Genuensis and Storchenau as holding this view.

    Among others, Liberatore, Lahousse, Pesch, Harper. _Cf._ URRABURU,
      _op. cit._, _ibid._

    Dupasquier, Mastrius and Rada, _apud_ URRABURU, _op. cit._, _ibid._,
      pp.  - .

    Urraburu, Schiffini, Mendive. _Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, _ibid._,
      p.  .

      Cor. xiii.  .

    “Ex hoc ipso quod quidditati esse attribuitur, non solum esse, sed
      ipsa quidditas creari dicitur: quia antequam esse habeat, nihil est,
      nisi forte in intellectu creantis, ubi non est creatura, sed
      creatrix essentia.”—ST. THOMAS, _De Potentia_, q. iii., art. v., ad
        um.

    “Ipsum esse competit primo agenti secundum propriam naturam: esse
      enim Dei est ejus substantia, ut ostensum est (_C. G._, Lib. i., c.
       ). Quod autem competit alicui secundum naturam suam, non convenit
      aliis nisi per modum participationis, sicut calor aliis corporibus
      ab igne [_i.e._ as caused or produced in them. _Cf._ Kleutgen, _op.
      cit._, Dissert., i., c. iii., §  ]. Ipsum igitur esse competit
      aliis omnibus a primo agente per participationem quamdam. Quod autem
      alicui competit per participationem, non est substantia ejus.
      Impossibile est igitur quod substantia alterius entis praeter agens
      primum sit ipsum esse. Hinc est quod Exod. iii., proprium nomen Dei
      ponitur esse _qui est_, quia ejus solius proprium est, quod sua
      substantia non sit aliud quam suum esse.”—ST. THOMAS, _Contra
      Gentes_, L. ii., cap.  , n.  .

      “Quod inest alicui ab agente, oportet esse actum ejus; agentis enim
      est facere aliquid actu. Ostensum est autem supra, quod omnes aliae
      substantiæ habent esse a primo agente, et per hoc ipsæ substantiæ
      creatæ sunt, quod esse ab alio habent. Ipsum igitur esse inest
      substantiis creatis ut quidam actus earum. Id autem, cui actus
      inest, potentia est: nam actus in quantum hujusmodi ad potentiam
      refertur. In qualibet igitur substantia creata est potentia et
      actus.”—_ibid._, cap.  , n.  .

      “Omne quod recipit aliquid ab alio, est in potentia respectu illius:
      et hoc quod receptum est in eo, est actus ejus; ergo oportet, quod
      ipsa forma vel quidditas, quæ est intelligentia [_i.e._ a pure
      spirit], sit in potentia respectu esse, quod a Deo recipit, et illud
      esse receptum est per modum actus, et ita invenitur actus et
      potentia in intelligentiis [_i.e._ pure spirits], non tamen forma et
      materia nisi aequivoce.”—_De Ente et Essentia_, cap. v. _Cf._ also
      _Summa Theol._, P. i., q. iii., art.  ; q. xiii., art.  ; q. lxxv.,
      art.  , ad   um. _Quodlibeta_, ii., art.  ; ix., art.  . _De
      Potentia_, q. vii., art.  . _In Metaph._, iii., Dist. vi., q.  ,
      art.  . _Contra Gentes_, L. ii., cap.  ,  . St. Thomas is usually
      interpreted as teaching that the distinction between essence and
      existence in created things is a real distinction. But there are
      some who have been unable to convince themselves that the Angelic
      Doctor has made his mind entirely clear on the subject. Kleutgen,
      for instance, writes (_op. cit._, Dissert. vi., c. ii., §  , n.
       ): “In the extracts quoted above St. Thomas clearly states that the
      distinction made by our thought is based on the nature of created
      things, but not that this distinction is that which exists between
      different parts, dependent on one another, each having its own
      proper being or reality.”

_    Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, §  ,  o.

_    Cf._ REINSTADLER, _Ontologia_, lib. ii., cap. i., art. ii., §  .

    Zigliara (_Ontologia_ ( ), iii. iv.) gives the virtual distinction
      as a sub-class of the real distinction; adding, however (according
      to Goudin, _Metaph._, Disp. i., q. iii. art. ii., § i) that “this
      virtual distinction is not so much a [real] distinction as the basis
      of a [mental] distinction”.

_    op. cit._, p.  .

    These may be seen in abundance in the works of any of the scholastic
      writers, medieval or modern, who discuss the question. _Cf._, _e.g._
      URRABURU, _op. cit._, §§  - .

    Besides St. Thomas (_cf._ _supra_, p.  , n.  ), Albertus Magnus
      ( - ), Aegidius Romanus († _circa_  ), Capreolus
      ( - ), Soncinas (†  ), Cajetan ( - ), Sylvester
      Ferrariensis ( - ), Dominicus Bañez ( - ), John of St.
      Thomas ( - ), Goudin ( - ), are among the most noted
      scholastics to hold this view. It is supported by the members of the
      Dominican Order generally; and by not a few Jesuits among recent
      scholastic writers; also by MERCIER, _op. cit._, §§  - .

_    Cf._ KLEUTGEN, _op. cit._, §  .

_    ibid._, §  .

_    Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, Disp. iv., cap. i., art.  , pp.  - .

    “Esse rei quamvis sit aliud ab ejus essentia, non tamen est
      intelligendum, quod sit aliquod superadditum, ad modum accidentis,
      sed quasi constituitur per principia essentiae. Et ideo hoc nomen,
      quod imponitur ab esse (ens) significat idem cum nomine quod
      imponitur ab ipsa essentia.”—ST. THOMAS, _In Metaph._, L. iv., l.  .

    Among the advocates of this view are Alexander of Hales (†  ),
      Aureolus (†  ), Durandus (†  ), Gabriel Biel (†  ), Suarez
      ( - ), Toletus ( - ), Vasquez ( - ), Gregory of
      Valentia († _circa_  ), and the Jesuits generally: some few
      regarding the distinction as _purely_ logical, _e.g._ Franzelin
      (_apud_ MERCIER, _op. cit._, §  , p.  , n.  ). For details and
      arguments on both sides, _cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, Disp. iv., cap.
      i., art.  .

    “Compositum ex esse et essentia dicitur de ratione entis creati
      secundum fundamentum, quod in ipso ente creato habet; hoc autem
      fundamentum non est aliud nisi quia creatura non habet ex se actu
      existere, sed tantum est ens potentiale, quod ab alio potest esse
      participare: nam hinc fit, ut essentia creaturae concipiatur a nobis
      ut potentiale quid, esse vero ut modus seu actus, quo talis essentia
      ens in actu constituitur.”—SUAREZ, _Metaph._, Disp. xxxi., §  .

    When we speak of an essence as _receiving_ existence, we do not
      necessarily imply a real distinction between receiver and received:
      “Non est imaginandum quod una res sit, quae participat sicut
      essentia, et alia quae participatur sicut esse, sed quia una et
      eadem res est realitas modo participato et per vim alterius sicut
      per vim agentis: haec enim realitas de se non est nisi sub modo
      possibili; quod autem sit et vocari possit actus, hoc habet per vim
      agentis.”—ALEXANDER OF HALES, _In Metaph._, L. vii., text  . “Non
      omne acceptum,” writes St. Thomas, “est receptum in aliquo subjecto;
      alioquin non posset dici quod tota substantia rei creatae sit
      accepta a Deo, cum totius substantiae non sit aliquod subjectum
      receptivum”—_Summa Theol._, I., q. xxvii., art. ii., ad.  um.

_    Cf._ MERCIER, _op. cit._, §  . Some of these doctrines we shall
      examine later, by way of illustration, in connexion with the _Unity_
      of being.

_    Cf._ URRABURU, _ibid._, art. iii., Obj.  , Resp.

    This view is advocated by, among others, Duns Scotus ( - ),
      Henry of Ghent (†  ), Francis de Vittoria ( - ), Dominicus
      de Soto ( - ), Molina ( - ), Fonseca ( - ), and
      Scotists generally.

    ARISTOTLE, _Metaph._, lib.  , text ii., cap.  ; ST. THOMAS, _in
      loc._ et alibi.

    “Si ... modus entis accipiatur ... secundum divisionem unius ab
      altero, ... hoc exprimit hoc nomen _aliquid_, dicitur enim aliquid
      quasi _aliud quid_. Unde sicut ens dicitur _unum_ inquantum est
      _indivisum in se_, ita dicitur _aliquid_ inquantum est _ab aliis
      diversum_.”—ST. THOMAS, _De Veritate_, q.  , a.  .

    “Nam omne ens est aut simplex, aut compositum. Quod autem est
      simplex, est indivisum et actu et potentia. Quod autem est
      compositum, non habet esse, quamdiu partes ejus sint divisae, sed
      postquam constituunt et componunt ipsum compositum. Unde manifestum
      est quod esse cujuslibet rei consistit in indivisione; et inde est,
      quod unumquodque sicut custodit suum esse, ita custodit suam
      unitatem.”—ST. THOMAS, _Summa Theol._, i., q. xi., a.  .

    “Unum vero quod est principium numeri, addit supra substantiam
      _rationem mensurae_, quae est propria passio quantitatis, et primo
      invenitur in unitate. Et dicitur per privationem vel negationem
      divisionis, quae est secundum quantitatem continuam. _Nam numerus ex
      divisione continui causatur._”—ST. THOMAS, _In Metaph._, lib.  ,
      lect.  , par. _b_.

    Those who regard the distinction between the essence and the
      existence of an actually existing substance as real consider the
      latter as an _ens unum per se_. The existence of a real distinction
      between the essential constitutive factors of a composite substance
      is universally regarded by scholastics as compatible with essential
      unity—unitas _per se_—in the latter. Such factors are really
      distinct, and separable or divisible, but actually undivided. So
      also, the union of an individual nature and its subsistence ( )
      forms a _unum per se_ (unum _compositionis_) in the view of those
      who place a real distinction between these factors.

    Of course essential unity of composition is also “natural”. _Cf._
      KLEUTGEN, _op. cit._, §§  - .

    “Unum quod convertitur cum ente ponit quidem ipsum ens, sed nihil
      superaddit, nisi negationem divisionis. Multitudo autem ei
      correspondens addit supra res, quæ dicuntur multæ, quod unaquæque
      earum sit una, et quod una earum non sit altera.... Et sic, cum unum
      addat supra ens unam negationem, secundum quod aliquid est indivisum
      in se, multitudo addit duas negationes, prout scilicet aliquid est
      in se indivisum, et prout est ab alio divisum, et unum eorum non
      esse alterum.”—ST. THOMAS, _De Potent._, q.  , a.  .

    “Sic ergo primo in intellectu nostro cadit _ens_, et deinde
      _divisio_, et post hoc _unum_ quod divisionem privat, et ultimo
      _multitudo_ quæ ex unitatibus constituitur.”—ST. THOMAS, _In
      Metaph._, lib.  , lect.  , par. _c_.

    Omnis pluralitas consequitur aliquam divisionem. Est autem duplex
      divisio: una materialis quæ fit secundum divisionem continui, et
      hanc sequitur numerus, qui est species quantitatis. Unde talis
      numerus, non est nisi in rebus materialibus habentibus quantitatem.
      Alia est divisio formalis, quæ fit per oppositas vel diversas
      formas: et hanc divisionem sequitur multitudo quæ non est in aliquo
      genere, sed est de transcendentibus, secundum quod ens dividitur per
      unum et multa. Et talem multitudinem solam contingit esse in rebus
      immaterialibus.—ST. THOMAS, _Summa Theol._, i., q. xxx., art.  .

    We may confine our attention here to substances, assuming for the
      present that accidents are individuated by the individual substances
      in which they inhere. We may note further that it is only corporeal
      individuals that fall directly within our experience. We can, of
      course, infer from the latter the actual existence of individual
      spiritual realities subsisting apart from matter, _viz._ human souls
      after death, and also the possibility of purely spiritual individual
      beings such as angels. But when we conceive these as individuals we
      must conceive them after the analogy of individuals in the domain of
      corporeal reality: it is only through concepts derived from this
      domain, and finding their _proper_ application within it, that we
      can have any knowledge of suprasensible or spiritual realities,
      _viz._ by applying those concepts _analogically_ to the latter.

    The “_formal-actual_” distinction, which Scotists advocate between
      these grades of being, we shall examine later.

_    Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, p.  : “Principium ... intrinsicum vel
      formale est aliquid insitum rei, pertinensque ad intrinsecam et
      ultimam individui constitutionem, et fundans formalitatem illam,
      quae _individitatio_ dicitur. Sicut enim materia est in homine, v.g.
      principium et fundamentum propter quod est, ac praedicatur
      _materialis_, et forma fundat in eodem praedicatum _rationalis_,
      totaque natura composita, _humanitas_, praedicatum _hominis_; ita
      quaerimus quid sit illud primum principium, unde existit in quovis
      individuo sua peculiaris ac propria individuatio.”

    In ancient Greece the Eleatics argued against the possibility of
      real plurality somewhat in this wise: If there were really different
      beings any two of them would differ from each other only by some
      third reality, and this again from each of the former by a fourth
      and a fifth reality, and so on _ad infinitum_: which would involve
      the absurdities of infinite number and infinite regress. A similar
      argument was used by the medieval pantheist, David of Dinant, to
      identify God with the material principle of corporeal reality: God
      and primary matter exist and do not differ; therefore they are
      identical: for if they differed they should differ by something
      distinct from either, and this again should differ from both by
      something distinct from all three, and so on _ad infinitum_: which
      is absurd. Such sophisms arise from accepting the purely abstract
      view of reality as adequate. We have seen already, in dealing with
      the abstract notion of being, that from this point of view it must
      be recognized and admitted that the reality whereby things differ
      (_viz._ being) is also the reality wherein they agree (_viz._ being,
      also). The paradox is restated below in regard to individuation.

    Materia ... dupliciter accipitur, scilicet, ut signata et non
      signata. Et dicitur signata, secundum quod consideratur cum
      determinatione dimensionum harum scilicet vel illarum; non signata
      autem, quæ sine determinatione dimensionum consideratur. Secundum
      hoc igitur est sciendum, quod materia signata est individuationis
      principium.—ST. THOMAS, _De Veritate_, q. ii., art.  , ad.  am.

_    Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, Disp. ii., cap.  , § iii., pp.  - .

    These will easily be found in any of the fuller scholastic
      treatises. _Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, Disp. ii., cap.  , art.  .
      _Philosophia Lacencis, Logica_, §§   _sqq._; MERCIER,
      _Ontologie_, §§  - ; KLEUTGEN, _Philosophie Scolastique_, §§  
      _sqq._; BULLIAT, _Thæsaurus Philosophiae Thomisticae_ (Nantes,
       ), pp.   _sqq._—a useful book of reference for the teaching of
      St. Thomas.

    A kindred view to this is the view that subsistence
      (“_subsistentia_,” “_suppositalitas_”) or personality
      (“_personalitas_”) is the principle of individuation. We shall see
      later in what subsistence or personality is supposed to consist.
      Here it is sufficient to observe that the individual nature as such
      has not necessarily subsistence or personality; hence it cannot be
      individuated by this latter.

    The consistent attitude for the Thomist here would, however, appear
      to be a denial that such a thing would be intrinsically possible.

    Hujusmodi relatio non potest consistere nisi in quodam ordine, quem
      ratio adinvenit alicujus ad seipsum secundum aliquas ejus duas
      considerationes.—ST. THOMAS, _Summa Theol._, i., q. xxviii., art.  ,
      ad.  am.

_    Cf._ _Science of Logic_, vol. i., §  .

    It is only the concrete and individual that as such can exist
      actually; the abstract and universal as such cannot exist actually:
      abstractness and universality are mental modes—_entia
      rationis_—annexed by the mind to the real content of its concepts:
      considered as thought-objects they are themselves not real entities:
      they do not affect reality as given to us in our experience. But
      perhaps concreteness and individuality are also mere mental modes,
      affecting reality not as given to us in our experience but only as
      subjected to the process of intellectual conception, or at least as
      subjected to the process of sense perception? This would appear to
      be part of the general Kantian theory of knowledge: that we can
      apprehend reality as concrete and individual only because space and
      time, which characterize the concrete and individual mode of being,
      are mental modes which must be applied to reality as a prerequisite
      condition for rendering the latter capable of apprehension in our
      experience. This contention is examined in another context. _Cf._
      _infra_, pp.  ,  ,  .

    Thus the recognition of a virtual distinction in a being is a sign
      of the _relative perfection_ of the latter: the being involves in
      its higher sort of unity perfections elsewhere dispersed and
      separate. The being is of a higher order than if the principles of
      these perfections in it were really distinct from one another. But
      the virtual distinction also seems to imply a _relative
      imperfection_ when it is found in creatures, inasmuch as here the
      thought-objects so distinguished are always principles of a
      plurality of really distinct accidental perfections: and real
      plurality in a being is less perfect than unity.—_Cf._ KLEUTGEN,
      _op. cit._, §  .

    “Omnis cognitio est a potentia et objecto, sive a cognoscente et
      cognito. Ratio a priori est, quia omnis cognitio saltem creata est
      expressio et imitatio atque imago vitalis objecti. Inquantum igitur
      est vitalis, procedit a cognoscente; implicat enim cognoscentem
      vivere per aliquid, quod ab ipso non est, sed pure illud recipit ab
      alio mere passive se habendo; inquantum vero cognitio est expressio,
      imitatio et imago objecti, procedit ab objecto”—SILVESTER MAURUS,
      _Quaest. Philos._, q.  . This is the common scholastic distinction:
      cognition as a product representative or expressive of reality is a
      product determined by the influence of reality (as active) on the
      mind (as passive); cognition as a vital process is active, a
      reaction of mind to the influence of reality. It may be remarked,
      however, that the cognitive process, as vital, has always a positive
      term. Our cognitive processes are partly at least processes of
      abstracting, comparing, relating, universalizing: processes which
      produce “_intentiones logicas_” or “_entia rationis_,” such as the
      “_intentio universalitatis_” the relation of subject to predicate,
      and other logical relations and logical distinctions: and hence
      arises the difficulty, when we come to reflect on our cognitive
      experience, of discriminating between these “logical entities” and
      the reality which we interpret by means of them: of discriminating,
      in other words, between logical and real distinctions.

    It is not necessary of course that this implicit embodiment of all
      the others, by any one of them, be seen to be _mutual_. It is
      sufficient, for instance, that of the concepts _a_, _b_, _c_ and
      _d_, _a_ be seen implicitly to involve _b_, _b_ to involve _c_,
      etc., though not _vice versa_. However, it must be remarked that in
      the exercise of _thought_ upon its _abstract_ objects we feel
      something wanting to our intellectual insight as long as the
      relations we apprehend are not _reciprocal_. In the sciences of
      abstract quantity we approximate to the ideal of establishing
      reciprocal relations throughout the whole system of the concepts
      analysed. But abstract thought does not give us an adequate
      apprehension of the real: it represents reality only under the
      _static_ aspect, and as _abstract_, _i.e._ apart from the
      individualizing conditions of time and space which affect its
      _concrete, actual existence_ as revealed in sense experience. Were
      we to neglect the latter, and consider merely what abstract thought
      gives us, we should regard as _really one_ what is _one for
      thought_. But what is one for thought is _the universal_; and the
      logical issue of holding the universal as such to be real is monism.
      Or again, to put the matter in another way, in so far as intellect
      sees the objects of its various abstract concepts to involve one
      another necessarily, it has no reason—as long as it ignores the
      verdict of sense experience on the real manifoldness of actually
      existing being—to abstain from attributing a _real unity_ to the
      whole system of abstract thought-objects which it contemplates as
      reciprocally and necessarily interrelated. On the contrary, it
      should pronounce that whatever plurality can be unified by the
      dialectically necessary relations discovered by thought, is _really
      one_, and must be regarded as _one reality_: which, again, is
      monism. But a philosophy which thus ignores sense experience must be
      one-sided and misleading.

_    Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, Disp. ii., cap. ii., art.   (p.  ).

_    Cf._ _infra_, §  .

_    Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, _ibid._ p.  .

    ST. THOMAS, _De Ente et Essentia_, cap. iv.: “Ideo, si quaeratur
      utrum ista natura possit dici una vel plures, neutrum concedendum
      est: quia utrumque est extra intellectum [conceptum] humanitatis, et
      utrumque potest sibi accidere. Si enim pluralitas esset de ratione
      ejus, nunquam posset esse una: cum tamen una sit secundum quod est
      in Sorte. Similiter si unitas esset de intellectu et ratione ejus,
      tunc esset una et eadem natura Sortis et Platonis, nec posset in
      pluribus plurificari.” _Cf._ ZIGLIARA, _Summa Philos._, _Ontologia_
      ( ), iv., v.; ( ) iv.

    “Licet enim (natura) nunquam sit sine aliquo istorum, non tamen est
      de se aliquod istorum, ita etiam in rerum natura secundum illam
      entitatem habet verum ‘esse’ extra animam reale: et secundum illam
      entitatem habet unitatem sibi proportionabilem, quae est indifferens
      ad singularitatem, ita quod non, repugnat illi unitati de se, quod
      cum quacumque unitate singularitatis ponatur.”—SCOTUS, _In L.
      Sent._,  , dist. iii., q.  .—_Cf._ DE WULF, _History of Medieval
      Philosophy_, p.  .

_    Cf._ _Science of Logic_, ii., §  . _Moral_ truth or veracity—the
      conformity of language with thought—is treated in Ethics.

_    Cf._ MERCIER, _Ontologie_, P. ii., §  , i.

_    Cf._ _Science of Logic_, ii., §§  - .

    “Si omnis intellectus (quod est impossibile) intelligeretur auferri,
      nullo modo ratio veritatis remaneret.”—ST. THOMAS, _De Veritate_, q.
      i., art  ,   in fine.

_    Cf._ ST. THOMAS, _De Veritate_, q. i., and _passim_.

    ST. THOMAS, _De Veritate_, q. i., art.  .

    ST. THOMAS, _De Veritate_, q. i., art.  ; _Summa Theol._, i., q.  ,
      art.  .

    “Si intellectus humanus non esset, adhuc res dicerentur veræ in
      ordine ad intellectum divinum. Sed si uterque intellectus, quod est
      impossibile, intelligeretur auferri, nullo modo ratio veritatis
      remaneret.”—ST. THOMAS, _De Veritate_, q. i., art.  .

    “Si ergo accipiatur veritas _rei_ secundum ordinem ad intellectum
      divinum, tunc quidem mutatur veritas rei mutablis in aliam
      veritatem, non in falsitatem.”—ST. THOMAS, _ibid._ q. i., art.  .

_    Cf._ ARISTOTLE, _De Anima_, iii.; ST. THOMAS, _De Veritate_, q. i.,
      art.  .

    “Res per se non fallunt, sed per accidens. Dant enim occasionem
      falsitatis; eo quod similitudinem eorum gerunt quorum non habent
      existentiam.... Res notitiam sui facit in anima per ea quae de ipsa
      exterius apparent ... et ideo quando in aliqua re apparent
      sensibiles qualitates demonstrantes naturam quae eis non subest,
      dicitur res illa esse falsa.... Nec tamen res est hoc modo causa
      falsitatis in anima, quod necessario falsitatem causat.”—ST. THOMAS,
      _Summa Theol._, i., q.  , art.  , ad.  ; _De Veritate_, q. i., art.
       , c.

    Καλῶς ἀπεφήναντο τἀγαθὸν, οὖ πάντα ἐφίεται.—ARISTOTLE, _Eth._, i.

_    Cf._ _Science of Logic_, ii., §  .

    “Bonum autem, cum habeat notionem appetibilis, importat habitudinem
      causæ finalis.”—ST. THOMAS, _Summa Theol._, i., q.  , art.  , ad.  .

    “Prima autem non possunt notificari per aliqua priora, sed
      notificantur per posteriora, sicut causæ per proprios effectus. Cum
      autem bonum proprie sit motivum appetitus, describitur bonum per
      motum appetitus, sicut solet manifestari vis motiva per motum. Et
      ideo dicit (Aristoteles) quod philosophi bene enunciaverunt bonum
      esse id quod omnia appetunt.”—ST. THOMAS, _Comment. in Eth. Nich._,
      i., lect.  a.

    The “end,” which is last in the order of actual attainment, is first
      as the ideal term of the aim or tendency of the nature: _finis est
      ultimus in executione, sed primus in intentione_: it is that for the
      sake of which, and with a view to which, the whole process of
      actualization or “perfecting” goes on. _Cf._ _infra_, §  .

    “Licet bonum et ens sint idem secundum rem; quia tamen differunt
      secundum rationem, non eodem modo dicitur aliquid ens simpliciter et
      bonum simpliciter. Nam, cum ens dicat aliquid esse in actu, actus
      autem proprie ordinem habeat ad potentiam, secundum hoc simpliciter
      aliquid dicitur esse ens secundum quod primo secernitur ab eo quod
      est in potentia tantum; hoc autem est esse substantiale rei
      uniuscujusque. Unde per suum esse substantiale dicitur unumquodque
      ens simpliciter; per actus autem superadditos dicitur aliquid esse
      secundum quid.... Sic ergo secundum primum esse, quod est
      substantiale, dicitur aliquid ens simpliciter et bonum secundum
      quid, id est, inquantum est ens; secundum vero ultimum actum dicitur
      aliquid ens secundum quid, et bonum simpliciter.”—ST. THOMAS, _Summa
      Theol._, i., q.  , art.  , ad.  .

    “Respectus ... qui importatur nomine boni est _habitudo perfectivi_
      secundum quodaliquid natum est perficere non solum secundum rationem
      speciei [_i.e._ the abstract essence], sed secundum esse quod habet
      in rebus; hoc enim modo finis perficit ea quae sunt ad finem.”—ST.
      THOMAS, _De Veritate_, q.  , art.  .

_    Cf._ the familiar ethical distinction between objective, and formal
      or subjective happiness, _beatitudo objectiva_ and _beatitudo
      formalis seu subjectiva_.

    “In motu appetitus, id quod est appetibile terminans motum appetitus
      secundum quid, ut medium per quod tenditur in aliud, vocatur
      _utile_. Id autem quod appetitur ut ultimum terminans totaliter
      motum appetitus sicut quaedam res in quam per se appetitus tendit,
      vocatur _honestum_; quia honestum dicitur quod per se desideratur.
      Id autem quod terminat motum appetitus, ut quies in se desiderata,
      est _delectabile_.”—ST. THOMAS, _Summa Theol._, i., q.  , art.  .

    Excellentia hominis maxime consideratur secundum virtutem, quae est
      dis positio perfecti ad optimum, ut dicitur in   Physic. Et ideo,
      honestum, _proprie loquendo_, in idem refertur cum virtute.—_ibid._,
       a  ae, q.  , art. I, c.

    “Eorum quae propter se apprehenduntur, quaedam apprehenduntur solum
      propter se, et nunquam propter aliud, sicut felicitas, quae est
      ultimus finis; quaedam vero apprehenduntur et propter se, in quantum
      habent in seipsis aliquam rationem bonitatis, etiamsi nihil aliud
      boni per ea nobis accideret, et tamen sunt appetibilia propter
      aliud, in quantum scilicet perducunt nos in aliquod bonum
      perfectius: et hoc modo virtutes sunt propter se
      apprehendendae.”—_ibid._, ad I.

_    Cf._ MERCIER, _op. cit._, p.  .

    “Omnia ... quae jam habent esse, illud esse suum naturaliter amant,
      et ipsam tota virtute conservant.... Ipsum igitur esse habet
      rationem boni. Unde sicut impossibile est quod sit aliquod ens quod
      non habeat esse, ita necesse est quod omne ens sit bonum ex hoc ipso
      quod habet esse.”—ST. THOMAS, _De Veritate_, q.  , art.  , c.

    “Non-esse secundum se non est appetibile, sed per accidens,
      inquantum scilicet ablatio alicujus mali est appetibilis; quod malum
      quidem aufertur per non-esse; ablatio vero mali non est appetibilis,
      nisi inquantum per malum privatur quoddam esse. Illud igitur, quod
      per se est appetibile, est esse; non-esse vero, per accidens tantum,
      inquantum scilicet quoddam esse appetitur, quo homo non sustinet
      privari; et sic etiam per accidens non-esse dicitur bonum.”—ST.
      THOMAS, _Summa Theol._, i., q.  , art.  , ad.  .

    “Malum est defectus boni quod natum est et debet haberi.”—ST.
      THOMAS, _Summa Theol._, i., q.  , art.  , c.

_    ibid._

    “Causam formalem malum non habet, sed est magis privatio
      formae.”—St. THOMAS, _Summa Theol._, i., q.  , art.  , c.

    “Nec causam finalem habet malum, sed magis est privatio ordinis ad
      debitum finem.”—_ibid._

    “Non est causa efficiens sed _deficiens_ mali, quia malum non est
      effectio sed _defectio_.”—_De Civ. Dei_, xii.,  .

    “O, altitudo divitiarum sapientiae, et scientiae Dei! Quam
      incomprehensibilia sunt judicia ejus, et investigabiles viae
      ejus!”—Rom. xi.,  .

    Connected with the transcendental notion of unity is another
      concept, that of _order_, which will be more fully examined when we
      come to treat of causes.

    BAUMGARTEN, a German philosopher of the eighteenth century, was the
      first to use the term _Aesthetica_ in this sense.

    “Dicendum est quod pulchrum est idem bono sola ratione differens.
      Cum enim bonum sit quod omnia appetunt, de ratione boni est, quod in
      eo quietetur appetitus; sed ad rationem pulchri attinet quod _in
      ejus aspectu seu cognitione_ quietetur appetitus; unde et illi
      sensus præcipue respiciunt pulchrum, qui maxime cognoscitivi sunt,
      scilicet visus et auditus rationi deservientes; dicimus enim pulchra
      visibilia et pulchros sonos; in sensibilibus autem aliorum sensuum
      non utimur nomine pulchritudinis; non enim dicimus pulchros sapores,
      aut odores.”—ST. THOMAS, _Summa Theol._, ia. iiæ., q.  , art.  ,
      ad.  .

    “Ad rationem pulchri pertinet, quod in ejus aspectu seu _cognitione_
      quietetur appetitus ... ita quod pulchrum dicatur id, cujus ipsa
      _apprehensio_ placet.”—ST. THOMAS, _Summa Theol._, ia. iiæ., q.  ,
      art.  , ad.  . And the Angelic Doctor justifies the extended use of
      the term _vision_: “De aliquo nomine dupliciter convenit loqui, uno
      modo secundum ejus primam impositionem, alio modo secundum usum
      nominis, sicut patet in nomine _visionis_, quod primo impositum est
      ad significandum actum sensus visus; sed propter dignitatem et
      certitudinem hujus sensus extensum est hoc nomen, secundum usum
      loquentium, ad omnem _cognitionem aliorum_ sensuum; dicimus enim:
      Vide quomodo sapit, vel quomodo redolet, vel quomodo est calidum; et
      ulterius etiam ad _cognitionem intellectus_, secundum illud Matt. v.
       : Beati mundi corde quoniam ipsi Deum videbunt.”—i., q.  , art.  ,
      c.

    “Pulchrum et bonum in subjecto quidem sunt idem, quia super eandem
      rem fundantur, scilicet super formam, et propter hoc bonum laudatur
      ut pulchrum: sed ratione differunt: nam bonum proprie respicit
      appetitum: ... et ideo habet rationem finis.... Pulchrum autem
      respicit vim cognoscitivam: pulchra enim dicuntur quæ visa
      placent.”—ST. THOMAS, _Summa Theol._, i., q.  , art.  , ad.  .

_    Cf._ DE WULF, _La Valeur esthétique de la moralité dans l’art_, pp.
       - .

_    L’Art et la Morale_, p.  .

_    De la connaissance de Dieu et de soi-même_, ch. i., §  .

_    De Vera Religione_, c.  .

_    Cf._ POINCARÉ, _Conférence sur les rapports de l’analyse et de la
      physique mathematique_.—_apud_ MERCIER, _Ontologie_, §  , pp.
       -  n.

    When the object so excels in greatness or grandeur as to exceed more
      or less our capacity to realize it we speak of it as _sublime_. The
      sublime calls forth emotions of self-abasement, reverence, and even
      fear. If an object possessing the other requisites of beauty is
      wanting in due magnitude, we describe it as _pretty_ or _elegant_.
      The terms _grace_, _graceful_, apply especially to gait, gesture,
      movement.

    On this point all the great philosophers are unanimous. For Plato,
      beauty whether of soul or of body, whether of animate or of
      inanimate things, results not from chance, but from order,
      rectitude, art: οὐχ οὕτως εἰκῆ κάλλιστα παραγίγνεται ἀλλὰ τάξει και
      ὀρθότητι καὶ τέχνῃ, ἥτις ἑκάστῳ ἀποδέδοται αὐτῶν (Plato, _Gorg._
       D). Aristotle places beauty in grandeur and order: Τὸ γὰρ καλὸν
      ἐν μεγέθει καὶ τάξει ἐστί (_Poetics_, ch. viii., n.  ). Τοῦ δὲ καλοῦ
      μέγιστα ἐίδη τάξις καὶ συμμετρία καὶ τὸ ὡρισμένον (_Metaph._, xii.,
      ch. iii., n.  ). “Nihil,” writes St. Augustine, “est ordinatum quod
      non sit pulchrum.” “Pulchra,” says St. Thomas, “dicuntur quae visa
      placent; unde pulchrum in debita proportione consistit” (_Summa
      Theol._, i., q.  , art.  , ad.  ).

    “Ad pulchritudinem tria requiruntur; primo quidem integritas sive
      perfectio; quae enim diminuta sunt, hoc ipso turpia sunt; et debita
      proportio sive consonantia; et iterum claritas.”—_Summa Theol._, i.,
      q.  , art.  , c. Elsewhere he omits integrity, supposing it implied
      in order: “ad rationem pulchri sive decori concurrit et claritas et
      debita proportio”. And elsewhere again he omits clarity, this being
      a necessary effect of order: “pulchrum in debita proportione
      consistit”.

    By “natural perfection” is meant the perfection which a nature
      acquires by the realization of its end ( ): Τέλειον δὲ τὸ ἔχον τέλος
      (Aristotle).

    This definition coincides with that found in a medieval scholastic
      treatise _De Pulchro et Bono_, attributed to St. Thomas or Albertus
      Magnas: “Ratio pulchri in universali consistit in resplendentia
      formae super partes materiae proportionatas, vel super diversas
      vires vel actiones.” _Cf._ MERCIER, _Ontologie_, p.  .

_    L’Idée du beau dans la philosophie de S. Thomas d’Aquin_, p.  .

_    Du Vrai, du Beau et du Bien_, viie leçon.

_    Kritik der Urtheilskraft_, Th. i., Abschn.  , B.  , passim.

    “Omnis corporea creatura ... bonum est infimum, _et in genere suo
      pulchrum_ quoniam forma et specie continetur.”—ST. AUGUSTINE, _De
      Vera Relig._, c.  .

    At the same time it must be borne in mind that many of the judgments
      by which things are pronounced “ugly” or “commonplace” are
      erroneous. This is partly because they are based on first and
      superficial sense impressions: beauty must be apprehended and judged
      by the _intellect_, and by the intellect “informed” with genuine
      knowledge; to the eye of enlightened intelligence there are beauties
      of structure and organization in the beetle or the tadpole as well
      as in the peacock or the spaniel. It is partly, too, because we
      unconsciously or semi-consciously apply standards of human beauty to
      beings that are merely animal: “To know really whether there are
      ugly monkeys we should have to consult a monkey; for the beauty we
      unconsciously look for, and certainly do not find, in the monkey, is
      the beauty of the human form; and when we declare the monkey ugly
      what we really mean is that it would be ugly if it were a human
      being; which is undeniable.”—SULLY-PRUDHOMME, _L’Expression dans les
      beaux arts_, p.  .

    Proverbs, xxxi.  .

    ST. THOMAS, _Summa Theol._, ia, iiae, q.  , art.  , c.

_    Cf._ _Science of Logic_, i., §§   _sqq._

_    Cf._ WINDELBAND, _History of Philosophy_ (tr. Tufts),
      _Introduction_.

_    Cf._ _Science of Logic_, ii. P. iv., ch. v.

_    Metaph._, vi.,  .

_    Cf._ ST. THOMAS, _Summa Theol._, i., q.  , art.  : “Illud proprie
      dicitur esse quod ipsum habet esse quasi in suo esse subsistens.
      Unde _solæ substantiæ proprie et vere dicuntur entia_; accidens vero
      non habet esse sed eo aliquid est, et hac ratione ens dicitur ...
      accidens dicitur _magis entis quam ens_.”

_    In Metaph._, L. v., lect.  ; cf. _In Physic._, L. iii., lect.  .

_    Science of Logic_, i., §§  ,  - .

_    ibid._, §§  ,  .

_    Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, §   (p.  ); MERCIER, _Logique_, §  
      ( th edit., p.  ).

_    Cf._ ST. THOMAS, _In Metaph._, L. xi., lect.  : “Sed sciendum est
      quod prædicamenta diversificantur secundum diversos modos
      prædicandi. Unde idem, secundum quod diversimode de diversis
      prædicatur, ad diversa prædicamenta pertinet.... Similiter motus
      secundum quod prædicatur de subjecto in quo est, constituit
      prædicamentum passionis. Secundum autem quod prædicatur de eo a quo
      est, constituit prædicamentum actionis.”

_    Ontologie_, §   ( rd edit., p.  ).

_    Cf._ _Essay concerning Human Understanding_, book iv., ch. vi., §
       : “Had we such ideas of substances, as to know what real
      constitutions produce those sensible qualities we find in them, and
      how these qualities flowed from thence, we could, by the specific
      ideas of their real essences in our own minds, more certainly find
      out their properties, and discover what properties they had or had
      not, than we can now by our senses: and to know the properties of
      gold, it would be no more necessary that gold should exist, than it
      is necessary for the knowing the properties of a triangle, that the
      triangle should exist in any matter; the idea in our minds would
      serve for the one as well as the other.”

    “Sensation convinces us that there are solid, extended substances;
      and reflection, that there are thinking ones: experience assures us
      of the existence of such beings.”—_ibid._, book ii., ch. xxiii., §
       . Locke protested repeatedly against the charge that he denied the
      existence of substances.

    The notion one has of pure substance is “only a supposition of he
      knows not what support of such qualities, which are capable of
      producing simple ideas in us; which qualities are commonly called
      accidents.... The idea then we have, to which we give the general
      name substance, being nothing but the supposed, but unknown support
      of those qualities we find existing, which we imagine cannot
      subsist, ‘sine re substante,’ without something to support them, we
      call that support _substantia_.”—book ii., ch. xxiii., §  . In the
      following passage we may detect the idealistic insinuation that
      knowledge reaches only to “ideas” or mental states, not to the
      extramental reality, the “secret, abstract nature of substance”:
      “Whatever therefore be the secret abstract nature of substance in
      general, all the ideas we have of particular distinct sorts of
      substances, are nothing but several combinations of simple ideas,
      co-existing in such, though unknown, cause of their union, as makes
      the whole subsist of itself”. It belongs, of course, to the Theory
      of Knowledge, not to the Theory of Being, to show how groundless the
      idealistic assumption is.

    Inquiring into the causes of our “impressions” and “ideas,” he
      admits the existence of “bodies” which cause them and “minds” which
      experience them: “We may well ask, _What causes induce us to believe
      in the existence of body_? but ’tis vain to ask, _Whether there be
      body or not_? That is a point, which we must take for granted in all
      our reasonings.”—_A Treatise on Human Nature_, Part iv., § ii.

    Of the definition of a substance as _something which may exist by
      itself_, he says: “this definition agrees to everything that can
      possibly be conceiv’d; and will never serve to distinguish substance
      from accident, or the soul from its perceptions.... Since all our
      perceptions are different from each other, and from everything else
      in the universe, they are also distinct and separable, and may be
      consider’d as separately existent, and may exist separately, and
      have no need of anything else to support their existence. They are,
      therefore, substances, as far as this definition explains a
      substance.”—_ibid._, § v. “We have no perfect idea of substance, but
      ... taking it for _something that can exist by itself_, ’tis evident
      every perception is a substance, and every distinct part of a
      perception a distinct substance.”—_ibid._

_    Cf._ MERCIER, _op. cit._, §   (p.  ).

_    Cf._ KLEUTGEN, _op. cit._, Dissert. vi., ch. iii., li, §  .

    Assuming for the moment that we can know substance to be not _one_
      but _manifold_: that experience reveals to us a plurality of
      numerically or _really_, and even specifically and generically,
      distinct substances. _Cf._ _infra_, p.  .

_    Cf._ HUXLEY, _Hume_, bk. ii., ch. ii. TAINE, _De L’Intelligence_,
      t. i., Preface, and _passim_.

_    Cf._ §  , _infra_.

    Such terms as “corruptible,” “destructible,” etc., imply certain
      attributes _of a thing_ which can be corrupted, destroyed.
      Conceiving this attribute in the abstract we form the terms
      “corruptibility,” “destructibility,” etc. So, too, the term
      “possibility” formed from the adjective “possible,” simply implies
      in the abstract what the latter implies in the concrete—an active or
      passive power _of a thing_ to cause or to become something; or else
      the mind’s conception of the non-repugnance of this something. To
      substantialize a possibility, therefore, is sufficiently absurd; but
      to speak of a possibility as real and at the same time to deny the
      reality of any subject in which it would have its reality, is no
      less so.

    except in the Blessed Eucharist: here we know from Divine Revelation
      that the accidents of bread and wine exist apart from their
      connatural substance. We cannot, by the light of reason, prove
      _positively_ the possibility of such separate existence of
      accidents; at the most, men of the supreme genius of an Aristotle
      may have strongly suspected such possibility, and may have convinced
      themselves of the futility of all attempts to prove in any way the
      impossibility of such a condition of things. Nor can we, even with
      the light of Revelation, do any more than show the futility of such
      attempts, thus _negatively_ defending the possibility of what we
      know from Revelation to be a fact.

_    Cf._ n.  .

_    Cf._ MAHER, _Psychology_, ch. xxii., for a full analysis and
      refutation of phenomenist theories that would deny the
      substantiality of the human person.

    “Substantia est res, cujus naturae debetur esse non in alio;
      accidens vero est res, cujus naturae debetur esse in
      alio.”—_Quodlib._, ix., a.  , ad.  .

_    Cf._ DESCARTES, _Oeuvres_, edit. Cousin, tome ix., p.  —_apud_
      MERCIER, _Ontologie_, p.  .

    PAULSEN, _Einleitung in die Philosophie_, Berlin,  , S.
       —_apud_ MERCIER, _loc. cit._

    and also _appetitive_; as in mental life appetition is a natural
      consequent of perception. It is in accordance with this latter idea
      that Wundt conceives all reality as being in its ultimate nature
      appetitive activity: the _Ego_ is a “volitional unit” and the
      universe a “collection of volitional units”.—_Cf._ WUNDT, _System
      der Philosophie_, Leipzig,  , S.  - .

_    Principles of Psychology_, Pt. ii., ch. i., §  .

    But from Descartes’ doctrine of two passive substances so
      antithetically opposed to each other the transition to Spinozism was
      easy and obvious. If mind and matter are so absolutely opposed as
      thought and extension, how can they unite to form one human
      individual in man? If both are purely passive, and if God alone puts
      into them their conscious states and their mechanical movements
      respectively, what remains proper to each but a pure passivity that
      would really be common to both? Would it not be more consistent then
      to refer this thought-essence or receptivity of conscious
      activities, and this extension-essence or receptivity of mechanical
      movements, to God as their proper source, to regard them as two
      attributes of His unique and self-existent substance, and thus to
      regard God as substantially immanent in all phenomena, and these as
      only different expressions of His all-pervading essence? This is
      what Spinoza did; and his monism in one form or other is the last
      word of many contemporary philosophers on the nature of the universe
      which constitutes the totality of human experience.—_Cf._ HÖFFDING,
      _Outlines of Psychology_, ch. ii., and criticism of same _apud_
      MAHER, _Psychology_, ch. xxiii.

    “Esse substantiæ non dependet ab esse alterius sicut ei inhærens,
      licet omnia dependeant a Deo sicut a causa prima.”—ST. THOMAS, _De
      Causa Materiæ_, cap. viii.

_    Cf._ KLEUTGEN, _op. cit._ §  .

_    Ibid._, §§  - .

    “Illud proprie dicitur esse, quod ipsum habet esse, quasi in suo
      esse subsistens. Unde solæ substantiæ proprie et vere dicuntur
      entia; accidens vero non habet esse, sed eo aliquid est, et hac
      ratione ens dicitur: sicut albedo dicitur ens quia ea aliquid est
      album. Et propter hoc dicitur in _Metaph._, l.   [al.  ], c. i.
      [Arist.], quod accidens dicitur magis entis quam ens.”—ST. THOMAS,
      _Summa Theol._, i. q.  , art.  . “Illud cui advenit accidens, est
      ens in se completum consistens in suo esse, quod quidem esse
      naturaliter præcedit accidens, quod supervenit: et ideo accidens
      superveniens, ex conjunctione sui cum eo, cui supervenit, non causat
      illud esse in quo res subsistit per quod res est ens per se: sed
      causat quoddam esse secundum, sine quo res subsistens intelligi
      potest esse, sicut primum potest intelligi sine secundo, vel
      prædicatum sine subjecto. Unde ex accidente et subjecto non fit unum
      per se, sed unum per accidens, et ideo ex eorum conjunctione non
      resultat essentia quædam, sicut ex conjunctione formæ cum materia:
      propter quod accidens neque rationem completæ essentiæ habet, neque
      pars completæ essentiæ est, sed sicut est ens secundum quid, ita et
      essentiam secundum quid habet.”—_De Ente et Essentia_, ch. vii.

    “Non est definitio substantiæ, ens per se sine subjecto, nec
      definitio accidentis, ens in subjecto; sed quidditati seu essentiæ
      substantiæ _competit_ habere _esse_ non in subjecto; quidditati
      autem sive essentiæ accidentis _competit_ habere _esse_ in
      subjecto.”—ST. THOMAS, _Summa Theol._, iii., q.  , art.  , ad.  .

_    Cf._ KLEUTGEN, _op. cit._, §§  - .

_    ibid._, §  .

_    Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, §§  - .

    KLEUTGEN, _op. cit._, §§  ,  .

    This logical usage is applied equally to attributes of a logical
      subject which is not itself a substance but an accident; it turns
      solely on the point whether the concept of the logical predicate of
      a judgment is or is not connected by an absolute logical connexion,
      a connexion of thought, with the concept of the logical subject.

_    Cf._ ST. THOMAS, _Quaest. Disp._, _De Spir. Creat._, art.  , ad.
       .

_    Cf._, however, §  , p.  , n.  , _infra_.

    St. Thomas, whose language is usually so moderate, thus expresses
      his view of the doctrine afterwards propounded by Descartes when the
      latter declared the essence of the soul to be thought: “Quidquid
      dicatur de potentiis animae, tamen nullus unquam opinatur, nisi
      insanus, quod habitus et actus animae sint ipsa ejus
      essentia.”—_Quaest. Disp., De Spir. Creat._, art.  , ad  . For a
      very convincing treatment of this question, _cf._ KLEUTGEN, _op.
      cit._, §§  - .

    DE SAN, _Cosmologia_, §  , _apud_ MERCIER, _op. cit._, §  .

_    op. cit._, §  .

    ST. THOMAS, _Summa Theol._, iii., q.  , art.  , c.

    Hence St. Thomas says, in regard to the Blessed Eucharist, that the
      accidents of bread and wine had not an existence of their own as
      long as the substance of bread and wine was there; that this is true
      of accidents generally; that it is not they that exist, but rather
      their subjects; that their function is to determine these subjects
      to exist as characterized in a certain way, as whiteness gives snow
      a white existence: “Dicendum quod accidentia panis et vini, manente
      substantia panis et vini non habebant ipsa _esse_ sicut nec alia
      accidentia, sed subjecta eorum habebant hujusmodi _esse_ per ea,
      sicut nix est alba per albedinem.”—_Summa Theol._, iii., q.  , art.
       , ad.  .

    For the arguments on both sides _cf._ MERCIER, _Ontologie_, §  
      (pp.   _sqq._). The indirect argument which the author derives
      from the fact that the Divine _Concursus_ is necessary for the
      activity of creatures, while offering an intelligible explanation of
      this necessity on Thomistic principles, does not touch the
      probability of other explanations.

_    Cf._ URRABURU’S definition: “entitas vel realitas a subjecto
      realiter distincta, cujus totum esse consistit in ultima
      determinatione rei ad aliquod munus obeundum, vel ad aliquam realem
      denominationem actu habendam, sine qua, saltem in individuo sumpta,
      res eadem potest existere absolute”.—_op. cit._, §   (p.  ).

_    Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, §   (p.  , _quarta opinio_), p.  .

    Whether immanent vital acts—especially of the spiritual faculties in
      man: thoughts, volitions, etc.—are mere modes, or whether they are
      absolute accidents, having their own proper and positive reality
      which perfects their subject by affecting it, is a disputed
      question. Habits, acquired by repetition of such acts, _e.g._
      knowledge and virtue, belonging as they do to the category of
      quality, are more than mere modalities of the human subject: they
      have an absolute, positive entity, whereby they add to the total
      perfection of the latter.

_    Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, §   (pp.   _sqq._).

    The fact that Aristotle [_Metaph._, lib. vii. (al. vi.), ch. iii.]
      seems to have placed a _real distinction_ between extension and
      corporeal substance, while he could not have suspected the absolute
      _separability_ of the former from the latter, would go to show that
      he did not regard separability as the only test of a real
      distinction. _Cf._ KLEUTGEN, _op. cit._, _ibid._

    Obviously we are not concerned herewith _all_ the attributes which
      by a necessity of thought we ascribe to an essence, _e.g._ the
      _corruptibility_ of a corporeal substance, or the _immortality_ of a
      spiritual substance. These are not entities really distinct from the
      substance, but only aspects which we recognize to be necessary
      corollaries of its nature. We are concerned only with properties
      which are real powers, faculties, forces, aptitudes of things.—_Cf._
      KLEUTGEN, _op. cit._, §  .

_    op. cit._, §  .

    “Tertii sunt, qui dicunt, quod potentiae animae nec adeo sunt idem
      ipsi animae, sicut sunt ejus principia intrinsica et essentialia,
      nec adeo diversae, ut cedant in aliud genus, sicut accidentia; sed
      in genere substantiae sunt per reductionem ... et ideo quasi medium
      tenentes inter utramque opinionem dicunt, quasdam animae potentias
      sic differre ad invicem, ut nullo modo dici possint una potentia:
      non tamen concedunt, eas simpliciter diversificari secundum
      essentiam, ita ut dicantur diversae essentiae, sed differre
      essentialiter in genere potentiae, ita ut dicantur diversa
      instrumenta ejusdem substantiae.”—_In lib._ ii., dist. xxiv., p.  ,
      art.  , q.  .

      In the same context he explains what we are to understand by
      referring anything to a certain category _per reductionem_: “Sunt
      enim quaedam, quae sunt in genere _per se_, aliqua _per reductionem_
      ad idem genus. Illa per se sunt in genere, quae participant
      essentiam completam generis, ut species et individua; illa vero per
      reductionem, quae nan dicunt completam essentiam.... Quaedam
      reducuntur sicut principia ... aut essentialia, sicut sunt materia
      et forma in genere substantiae; aut integrantia, sicut partes
      substantiae.... Quaedam reducuntur sicut _viae_ ... aut sicut _viae
      ad res_, et sic motus et mutationes, ut generatio, reducuntur ad
      substantiam; aut sicut _viae a rebus_, et sic habent reduci
      potentiae ad genus substantiae. Prima enim agendi potentia, quae
      egressum dicitur habere ab ipsa substantia, ad idem genus reducitur,
      quae non adeo elongatur ab ipsa substantia, ut dicat aliam essentiam
      completam.”—_ibid._, ad.  .

    “Quoniam potentia creaturae arctata est, non potuit creatura habere
      posse perfectum, nisi esset in ea potentiarum multitudo, ex quarum
      collectione sive adunatione, una supplente defectum alterius,
      resultaret unum posse completum, sicut manifeste animadverti potest
      in organis humani corporis, quorum unumquodque indiget a virtute
      alterius adjuvari.”—_In lib._ ii., dist. xxiv., p.  , art.  , q.  .

    The student will find in MAHER’S _Psychology_ (ch. iii.) a clear and
      well-reasoned exposition of the inconsistency and groundlessness of
      such attacks on the doctrine of faculties.

_    Cf._ KLEUTGEN, _op. cit._, §  - .

    “Cum corpus hominis aut cujuslibet alterius animalis sit quoddam
      totum naturale, dicit unum ex eo quod unam formam habeat qua
      perficitur non solum secundum aggregationem aut compositionem, ut
      accidit in domo et in aliis hujusmodi. Unde opportet quod quaelibet
      pars hominis et animalis recipiat esse [_i.e._ sibi proprium] et
      speciem ab anima sicut a propria forma. Unde Philosophus dicit (l.
      ii. de anima, text.  ), quod recedente anima neque oculus neque caro
      neque aliqua pars manet nisi aequivoce.”—ST. THOMAS, _Quaest. Disp.
      de anima_, art.  —_apud_ KLEUTGEN, _op. cit._, §  .

    The most perfect real unity is of course that which includes all
      perfection in the simplicity of its actual essence, without any
      dispersion or plurality of its being, without any admixture of
      accident or potentiality. Such is the unity of the Infinite Being
      alone. No finite being possesses its actuality _tota simul_. And the
      creature falls short of perfect unity in proportion as it attains to
      this actuality only by a multiplicity of real changes, by a variety
      of really distinct principles and powers, essential and accidental,
      in its concrete mode of being. In proportion as created things are
      higher or lower in the scale of being ( ), they realize a higher or
      a lower grade of unity in their mode of individual existence.

    We are concerned here only with finite, created substances, as
      distinct from the Divine Uncreated Substance on whom these depend
      ( ).

    ARISTOTLE, _Categ._ ch. iii., _passim_; _Metaph._, l. v. (al. vi.),
      ch. viii.; ST. THOMAS, _In Metaph._, l. v. lect.  ; KLEUTGEN, _op.
      cit._, §  - .

_    Cf._ KLEUTGEN, _op. cit._, §§  ,  - .

_    Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, §§  ,  .

_    Cf._ _Science of Logic_, ii., §   (pp.   _sqq._).

    Sciendum est quod nomen naturae significat quodlibet principium
      intrinsicum motus; secundum quod Philosophus dicit quod _natura est
      principium motus in eo in quo est per se, et non secundum
      accidens_.—ST. THOMAS, _Summa Theol._, iii., q.  , art.   in c.

    And here we are reminded of the view of many medieval scholastics of
      high authority, that the same material entity can have at the same
      time a plurality of formative principles or _substantial forms_ of
      different grades of perfection.

_    Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, §   (p.  ).

    For want of a more appropriate rendering we translate the Latin term
      _suppositum_ (Gr. ὑπόστασις) by the phrase “subsisting thing”;
      though the classical terms are really generic: _suppositum_ being a
      genus of which there are two species, _suppositum irrationale_
      (“_thing_” or “subsisting _thing_”) and _suppositum rationale_
      (“_person_”).—_Cf._ _infra_, pp.  - .

    Complete in every way: in _substantial_ and in _specific_
      perfections. The separated soul, though it is an existing individual
      substance, retains its essential communicability to its connatural
      material principle, the body. Hence it has not “subsistence,” it is
      not a “person”.—_Cf._ _infra_, p.  .

    “Per se agere _convenit per se existenti_. Sed per se existens
      quandoque potest dici aliquid, si non sit inhærens ut accidens, vel
      ut forma materialis, etiamsi sit pars. Sed proprie et per se
      subsistens dicitur quod neque est praedicto modo inhærens neque est
      pars. Secundum quem modum oculus aut manus non potest dici per se
      subsistens, et per consequens nec per se operans. Unde et
      operationes partium attribuuntur toti per partes. Dicimus enim quod
      homo videt per oculum et palpat per manum.”—ST. THOMAS, _Summa
      Theol._, i., q.  , art.  , ad.  .

_    Cf._ preceding note. St. Thomas continues: “Potest igitur dici quod
      anima intelligit, sicut oculus videt, sed magis proprie dicitur quod
      homo intelligat per animam” (ibid.); and elsewhere he writes:
      “Dicendum quod anima est pars humanae speciei [_i.e._ naturae]. Et
      ideo, licet sit separata, quia tamen retinet naturam unibilitatis,
      non potest dici substantia individua quae est hypostasis vel
      substantia prima, sicut nec manus, nec quaecumque alia partium
      hominis; et sic non competit ei neque definitio personae, neque
      nomen.”—_Summa Theol._, i., q.  , art.  , ad.  .

_    Cf._ _Science of Logic_, i., §§  - .

    All _created_ subsisting things and persons depend, of course,
      essentially on the Necessary Being for their existence and for their
      activity. This Necessary Being we know from Revelation to be
      _Triune_, Three in Persons, One in Nature. The subsistence of each
      Divine Person of the Blessed Trinity excludes _all_ modes of
      dependence.

    “Hoc ... quod est per se agere, excellentiori modo convenit
      substantiis rationalis naturae quam aliis. Nam solae substantiae
      rationales habent dominium sui actus, ita quod in eis est agere et
      non agere; aliae vero substantiae magis aguntur quam agunt. Et ideo
      conveniens fuit ut substantia individua _rationalis_ naturae
      speciale nomen haberet.”—ST. THOMAS, _Quaest. Disp. de Potentia_, q.
      ix., art.  , ad.  .

_    Cf._ BILLOT, _De Verbo Incarnato_, q. ii.—_apud_ MERCIER, _op.
      cit._, §   (pp.  - ).

_    Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, §  , for an exhaustive list of the
      authorities in favour of each of the various views propounded in
      this present context.

    “Natura singularis et integra per se consituitur in sua
      independentia, non aliquo positivo addito ultra illam entitatem
      positivam, qua est haec natura.”—SCOTUS, iii., Dist. i. q.  , n.  
      and n.  , ad.  . _Cf._ SUAREZ, _Metaph._, Disp. xxxiv. §  ;
      KLEUTGEN, _op. cit._, §  ; FRANZELIN, _De verbo Incarnato_, Th.
      xxix.

_    op. cit._, §   (p.  ).

    Neither is it a _natural_ union in the sense of being _due_ to the
      human nature; it is wholly _undue_ to the latter, and is in this
      sense _supernatural_.

_    op. cit._, §   (p.  ).

_    ibid._ Farther on (p.  ) he says it is certain that the Divine
      Nature of the Word is _substantially_ united with humanity in a
      unity of person or subsistence: “certum est eamdem [naturam divinam]
      substantialiter uniri cum humanitate in unitate suppositi;” and for
      this he considers that the human nature must be incomplete “in
      ratione personae”. But this proves nothing; for of course the human
      nature must be wanting in personality. But it is complete _as a
      nature_. Nor does the aphorism he quotes—“Quidquid substantiae in
      sua specie completae accedit, accidens est,”—apply to subsistence or
      personality supervening on a complete substance.

    “Humanitas illa [_scil._ Christi], quamvis completa in _esse_
      naturae, non tamen habet ultimum complementum in genere substantiae
      cum in se non subsistat.”—_ibid._, §   (p.  ).

    This view, which has many supporters, is clearly explained and ably
      defended by MERCIER in his _Ontologie_, §   (pp.  - ), §  
      (pp.  - ), §   (p.  , n.  ).

_    Cf._ MERCIER, _op. cit._, §   (p.  , n.  ).

    Hence Urraburu gives this _real_ definition of subsistence: _ultimus
      naturae terminus in ordine substantiali_ sive in ratione existentis
      per se: the ultimate term (or determination) of a nature in the
      order of substantiality or of “existing by itself”—_op. cit._, §  
      (p.  ).

    “Sicut enim modus accidentalis figurae terminat quantitatem, et
      modus ubicationis constituit rem hic et non alibi, ita modus
      substantialis personalitatis terminans naturam reddit illam
      incommunicabilem alieno supposito.”—URRABURU, _op. cit._, §   (p.
       ).

    The terms “Self,” “_Ego_,” and “Person” we take to be identical in
      reference to the human individual. The _mind_ is not the _Ego_,
      self, or person, but only a part of it.—_Cf._ MAHER, _Psychology_,
      ch. vi., p.  .

_    Cf._ MAHER, _Psychology_, ch. xvii.

_    ibid._, p.  .

_    Cf._ MAHER, _Psychology_, p.  .

_    Cf._ MAHER, _Psychology_, p.   (italics in last sentence ours).

_    Cf._ RICKABY, _First Principles_, p.  .

_    Cf._ MAHER, _ibid._, pp.  - ; MERCIER, _Psychologie_, ii., pp.
       -  ( th edit.); _Ontologie_, §   (p.  ).

    There are cogent theological reasons also against the view that
      consciousness constitutes personality. For instance, the human
      nature of our Divine Lord has its own proper consciousness, which,
      nevertheless, does not constitute this nature a person.

_    Essay Concerning Human Understanding_, bk. ii., ch. xxvii.

    “That being then one plant which has such an organization of parts
      in one coherent body partaking of one common life, it continues to
      be the same plant as long as it continues to partake of the same
      life, though that life be communicated to different particles of
      matter vitally united to the living plant, in a like continued
      organization conformable to that sort of plants....

      “The case is not so much different in brutes, but that anyone may
      hence see what makes an animal and continues it the same....

      “This also shows wherein the identity of the same man consists:
      _viz._ in nothing but a participation of the same continued life, by
      constantly fleeting particles of matter, in succession vitally
      united to the same organized body.... For if the identity of soul
      alone makes the same man, and there be nothing in the nature of
      matter why the same individual spirit may be united [_i.e._
      successively] to different bodies, it will be possible that ... men
      living in distant ages, and of different tempers, may have been the
      same man....”—_Essay Concerning Human Understanding_, bk. ii. ch.
      xxvii. §  - . Yet though “identity of soul” does not make “the same
      man,” Locke goes on immediately to assert that identity of
      _consciousness_, which is but a function of the soul, makes _the
      same person_.

_    Essay Concerning Human Understanding_, bk. ii., ch. xxvii., §  .
      Names do not stand for ideas or concepts but for _conceived_
      realities; and the question here is: What is the conceived reality
      (in the existing human individual) for which the term “person”
      stands?

_    ibid._, §  .

_    Essay Concerning Human Understanding_, bk. ii., ch. xxvii., §§  ,
       .

_    Essay Concerning Human Understanding_, bk. ii., ch. xxvii., §  .

    For a searching criticism of such theories of the Ego or human
      person, _cf._ MAHER, _Psychology_, ch. xxii.

_    ibid._, §  .

    p.  .

_    Cf._ MAHER’S criticism of Professor James’ theory on double
      personality (_op. cit._, ch. xxii., pp.  - ): “Professor James
      devotes much space to these ’mutations’ of the Ego, yet overlooks
      the fact that they are peculiarly fatal, not to his adversaries, but
      to his own theory that ‘the present thought is the only thinker,’
      and that seeming identity is sufficiently preserved by each thought
      ’appropriating’ and ‘inheriting’ the contents of its predecessor.
      The difficulties presented to this process of inheritance by such
      facts as sleep and swooning have been already dwelt upon [_cf._
      _ibid._, p.   (c)]; but here they are if possible increased. The
      last conscious thought of, say, Felida   has to transmit its
      gathered experience not to its _proximate_ conscious successor,
      which is Felida  , but across seven months of vacuum until on the
      extinction of Felida   the next conscious thought which constitutes
      Felida   is born into existence. If the single personality is hard
      for Mr. James to explain, ‘double-personality’ at least doubles his
      difficulties.”

_    Cf._ _infra_, §  .

    Ποιότητα δὲ λέγω, καθ᾽ ἤν ποιοί τινες εἰναι λέγονται.—_Categ._, ch.
      iv. _Cf._ ST. THOMAS: “Haec est ratio formalis qualitatis, per quam
      respondemus interroganti qualis res sit.”

    The other accidents, _e.g._ _actio_ and _passio_, in so far as they
      change the perfection of the substance, do so only by producing
      qualities in it. Quantity, which is the connatural accident of all
      corporeal substance, adds of itself no special complement or degree
      of accidental perfection to the latter, in the sense of disposing
      (or indisposing) the latter for the attainment of the full and final
      perfection due to its specific nature; but only in the sense that it
      supposes more or less of that kind of substance to exist, or in the
      sense in which it is understood to include the _qualities_ of which
      it may be the _immediate_ subject.—_Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, §
       .

_    In Praedicamenta_, ch. i.

_    Cf._ MAHER, _Psychology_, ch. xii, xiii, xxiii, xxv. BERGSON
      rightly recognizes the irreducibility of quality to quantity (_Essai
      sur les données immediates de la conscience, passim_). But he
      wrongly infers from this “fundamental antinomy,” as he calls it, the
      existence, in each human individual, of a two-fold _Ego_, a deeper
      self where all is quality, and a superficial self which projects
      conscious states, in static and numerical isolation from one
      another, into a homogeneous space where all is quantitative,
      mathematical. The reasonable inference is merely that the human mind
      recognizes in the data of its experience a certain richness and
      variety of modes of real being.

_    Metaph._ V., ch. xiv., where the four groups are finally reduced to
      two.

_    Summa Theol._, ia, iiae, q.  , art.  .

    To be distinguished from the _passio_ which is correlative of
      _actio_ and which consists in the actual undergoing of the latter,
      the actual reception of the accidental form which is the term of the
      latter.

    “Inter omnes qualitates, figurae maxime sequuntur et demonstrant
      speciem rerum. Quod maxime in plantis et animalibus patet, in quibus
      nullo certiori indicio diversitas specierum dijudicari potest, quam
      diversitate figurae.”—ST. THOMAS, _In_ VII. _Physic_, lect.  .

    Every natural habit, as we have just seen, has an essential relation
      to _activity_. Every such habit inheres immediately in some
      operative faculty, as science in the intellect, or justice in the
      will. All natural habits are _operative_. There is, however, as we
      know from Divine Revelation, an “entitative” habit, a _habitus
      entitativus_, which affects the substance itself of the human soul,
      ennobling its natural mode of being and so perfecting it as to raise
      it to a higher or supernatural plane of being, to an order of
      existence altogether undue to its nature: the _supernaturally
      infused_ habit of _sanctifying grace_.

_    Eth. Eud._, ii.,  .

    “Vires naturales non agunt operationes suas mediantibus aliquibus
      habitibus, quia secundum seipsas sunt determinatae ad unum.”—_Summa
      Theol._, ia iiæ, q.  , art.  , ad  .

    “Intellectus ... est subjectum habitus. Illi enim competit esse
      subjectum habitus quod est in potentia ad multa; et hoc maxime
      competit intellectui....”—ST. THOMAS, _Summa Theol._, ia, iie, q.
       , art.  , ad.  . “Omnis potentia quae diversimode potest ordinari
      ad agendum, indiget habitu, quo bene disponatur ad suum actum.
      Voluntas autem cum sit potentia rationalis, diversimode potest ad
      agendum ordinari: et ideo oportet in voluntate aliquem habitum
      ponere, quo bene disponatur ad suum actum ...,”—_ibid._ art.  , in
      c.

    “Habitualis dispositio requiritur ubi subjectum est in potentia ad
      multa. Operationes vero quae sunt ab anima per corpus, principaliter
      quidem sunt ipsius animae, secundario vero ipsius corporis. Habitus
      autem proportionantur operationibus; unde ex similibus actibus
      similes habitus causantur, ut dicitur in   Ethic., cap.   et  ; in
      corpore vero possunt esse secundario, inquantum scilicet corpus
      disponitur et habilitatur ad prompte deserviendum operationibus
      animae.”—_Summa Theol._, ia iiæ, q.  , art.  , in c.

_    Cf._ ST. THOMAS, _ibid._, q.  , art.  .—MERCIER, _Ontologie_, §
       .

    According to the scholastic theory of matter and form the matter
      must be predisposed by certain qualities for the reception of a
      given substantial form. The chemical elements which form a compound
      will not do so in any and every condition, but only when definitely
      disposed and brought together under favourable conditions. These
      elementary qualities, considered in themselves, are not habits or
      dispositions: “Unde qualitates simplices elementorum, quae secundum
      unum modum determinatum naturis elementorum conveniunt, non dicimus
      _dispositiones_ vel _habitus_, sed _simplices qualitates_.”—ST.
      THOMAS, _ibid._, q.  , art.  , in C. They are natural qualities and
      not dispositions produced by disposing causes.

    St. Thomas regards the distinction between _habits_ and mere
      dispositions as a distinction not of _degree_ but of _kind_:
      “Dispositio et habitus possunt distingui sicut diversae species
      unius generis subalterni, ut dicantur _dispositiones_ illae
      qualitates primae speciei quibus convenit secundum propriam rationem
      ut de facili amittantur, quia habent causas mutabiles, ut aegritudo
      et sanitas; _habitus_ vero dicantur illae qualitates quae secundum
      suam rationem habent quod non de facili transmutentur quia habent
      causas immobiles; sicut scientia et virtutes; et secundum hoc
      disposito non fit habitus.”—ST. THOMAS, _Summa Theol._, ia, iiæ, q.
       , art.  , ad.  .

    “Vires sensitivae _dupliciter_ possunt considerari: _uno modo_,
      secundum quod operanter ex instinctu naturae; _alio modo_, secundum
      quod operantur ex imperio rationis. Secundum igitur quod operantur
      ex instinctu naturae, sic ordinantur ad unum, sicut et natura; et
      ideo sicut in potentiis naturalibus non sunt aliqui habitus, ta
      etiam nec in potentiis sensitivis, secundum quod ex instinctu
      naturae operantur. Secundum vero quod operantur ex imperio rationis,
      sic ad diversa ordinari possunt: et sic possunt esse in eis aliqui
      habitus, quibus bene aut male ad aliquid disponuntur.”—ST. THOMAS,
      _ibid._, q.  , art.  , in c. In this context the angelic doctor,
      following Aristotle, places the virtues of temperance and fortitude
      in the sense _appetite_ as controlled by the rational will. For the
      same reason he admits the possibility of habits in the faculties of
      _internal_ sense perception, though not in the _external_ senses
      (_ibid._, ad.  ).

    “Quia bruta animalia a ratione hominis per quandam consuetudinem
      disponuntur ad aliquid operandum sic, vel aliter, hoc modo in brutis
      animalibus habitus quodammodo poni possunt.... Deficit tamen ratio
      habitus quantum ad usum voluntatis quia non habent dominium utendi
      vel non utendi, quod videtur ad rationem habitus pertinere; et ideo,
      proprie loquendo, in eis habitus esse non possunt.”—_ibid._, ad.  .

    It must not be forgotten that habit is an _accident_, an accidental
      perfection of the substance or nature of an individual agent; it
      immediately affects the operative power of the agent, which
      operative power is itself an accident of this agent’s nature
      (constituting the second sub-class of the accident, _Quality_).
      Habit is thus at once an _actuality_ or actualization of the
      operative power and a _potentiality_ of further and more perfect
      acts. It is intermediate between the operative power and the
      complete actualization which the power receives by the acts that
      spring from the latter as perfected by the habit. Faculty and habit
      form one complete proximate principle of those acts: a principle
      which is at once a partial actualization of the individual agent’s
      nature and a potentiality of further actualization of this nature.

    “Si potentiae animae non sunt ipsa essentia animae, sequitur quod
      sint accidentia in aliquo novem generum contenta. Sunt enim in
      secunda specie qualitatis, quæ dicitur potentia vel impotentia
      naturalis.”—_Q. Disp. de Spir. Creat._, art.  , in c.

_    Cf._ ST. THOMAS, _Summa Theol._, i., q.  , art.  , in c.—“Cum
      potentia et actus dividant ens, et quodlibet genus entis, opportet
      quod ad idem genus referatur potentia et actus; et ideo si actus non
      est in genere substantiae, potentia, quæ dicitur ad illum actum, non
      potest esse in genere substantiae. Operatio autem animae non est in
      genere substantiae, sed in solo Deo, cujus operatio est ejus
      substantia.”—_Cf._ ZIGLIARA, _Ontologia_ ( ), xi.: “Actus et
      potentia essentialiter ad illum actum ordinata sunt in eodem genere
      supremo.”

    “Nec in angelo, nec in aliqua creatura, virtus vel potentia
      operativa est idem quod sua essentia.... Actus ad quem comparatur
      potentia operativa est operatio. In angelo autem non est idem
      intelligere et esse; nec aliqua alia operatio, aut in ipso aut in
      quocunque alio creato, est idem quod ejus esse. Unde essentia angeli
      non est ejus potentia intellectiva, nec alicujus creati essentia est
      ejus operativa potentia.”—_ibid._, q.  , art  .

    As we shall see later, action as such does not perfect or change the
      _agens_, unless when, as in immanent action, the _agens_ is
      identical with the _patiens_. Action formally actualizes or perfects
      the _patiens_: _actio fit in passo_. But the exercise of any
      activity by an agent undoubtedly connotes or implies a perfection of
      this agent. It is not, however, that the actual operation as such
      (unless it is immanent) adds a new perfection to the agent. Rather
      the agent’s _power_ of acting, revealed to us in its exercise, is
      for us a measure of the actual perfection of the agent. But the
      question remains: Is this power or perfection, so far as we know it,
      a _substantial_ perfection? Is it _the very perfection itself of the
      agent’s substance or nature_ as known to us? Or is it an
      _accidental_ perfection which is for us an index of a corresponding
      degree of substantial perfection? In getting our knowledge of the
      nature of a substance from a consideration of its _sensible_
      accidents, its _phenomena_, its _operations_—according to the rule,
      _Operari sequitur esse: qualis est operatio talis est natura_—can we
      use a _single_ inference, from _action_ to _nature_, or must we use
      a _double_ inference, from action to power, and from power to
      nature? But even if we have to make the double inference, this _of
      itself_ does not prove any more than a conceptual distinction
      between _power_ and _nature_.

_    Cf._. ST. THOMAS, _Q. Disp. de spir. creat._, art.  , in c.—MAHER,
      _Psychology_ ch. iii.

_    Cf._ MERCIER, _Ontologie_, §  .

_    Cf._ _ibid._, _op. cit._, §  ; MAHER, _Psychology_, ch. iii. (p.
       , n.  .)

    Of course all accidents are “forms” in the sense of being
      _determining principles_ of their subjects, these being considered
      as _determinable_ or _receptive_ principles. Even quantity is a form
      in this sense. But quantity itself does not appear to be a “simple”
      principle in the sense of being “indivisible”: its very function is
      to make the corporeal substance divisible into integral parts. What
      then of all those qualities which inhere _immediately_ in the
      quantity of corporeal substances? They are determinations or
      affections of a composite, extended, divisible subject. Conceived in
      the abstract they have, of course, the attributes of indivisibility,
      immutability, etc., characteristic of all _abstract_ essences ( ).
      But in their physical actuality in what intelligible sense can they
      be said to be simple, indivisible entities?

_    Summa Theol._, ia, iiae, q.  , art.  ; iia, iiae, q.  , art.  ,
       .—_Q. Disp. de Virtutibus in communi_, q. i, art.  , in c.—I. _In
      Sentent._, _Dist._,  , q.  , art.  .—_Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, §§
       - , for arguments and authorities. The author himself defends
      the former view, according to which alteration takes place by a real
      addition or substraction of grades of the same quality.

    I. _In Sentent._, _Dist._,  , q.  , art.  .

    iia, iiae, q.  , art.  , ad.  .

_    Q. Disp. de Virtut._, q.  , art.  , in c.

    The scientific concept of “volume” is identical with the common and
      philosophical concept of “external, actual, local, or spatial
      extension”. The functions ascribed by physics and mechanics to the
      “mass” of a body have no other source, in the body, than what
      philosophers understand by the “internal extension” or “quantity” of
      the body.—_Cf._ Nys, _Cosmologie_ (Louvain,  ), §§  - .

    The terms _quantity_ and _extension_ are commonly taken as
      synonymous; but _quantity_ is more properly applied to the internal
      plurality of integral parts of the substance itself, _extension_ to
      the dispersion of these parts outside one another in space.

    Hence Aristotle’s definition in _Metaph._, iv.: “Quantum dicitur,
      quod [est] in insita divisibile, quorum utrumque aut singula unum
      quid et hoc quid apta sunt esse”: a quantified substance is one
      which is divisible into parts that are really in it [_i.e._ _partes
      integrantes_], parts each of which is capable of becoming a distinct
      subsisting individual thing.—_Cf._ NYS, _Cosmologie_, §  .

    “Longitudo, latitudo et profunditas quantitates quaedam, sed non
      substantiae sunt. Quantitas enim non est substantia, sed magis cui
      haec ipsa primo insunt illud est substantia.”—_Metaph._, L. vii.,
      ch. iii.

_    Physic_, L. i., ch. ii.

    L. ii., ch. iv.

_    Cf._ §   _supra_.

    “Propria ... totalitas substantiae continetur indifferenter in parva
      vel magna quantitate; sicut ... tota natura hominis in magno, vel
      parvo homine.”—_Summa Theol._, iii., q.  , art.  , ad.  .

    No argument in favour of this view can be based on the use of the
      term _species_ (“_manentibus dumtaxat speciebus panis et vini_”) by
      the Fathers of the Council of Trent. For them, as for all Catholic
      philosophers and theologians of the time, the scholastic term
      _species_, used in such a context, meant simply the objective,
      perceptible accidents of the substance. _Cf._ NYS, _op. cit._, §
       .

    Hence the significance of the lines in ST. THOMAS’ hymn, _Adoro Te
      devote_:—

      _Visus, tactus, gustus_ in te fallitur,
      Sed _auditu_ solo tuto creditur.

    and neither does Revelation. The Body of our Blessed Lord exists in
      the Eucharist without its connatural external extension and
      consequent impenetrability. But according to the common teaching of
      Catholic theologians it has its _internal quantity_, its distinct
      integral parts, organs and members—really distinct from one another,
      though interpenetrating and not spatially external to one another.
      Its mode of existence in the space occupied by the sacramental
      species is thus analogous to the mode in which the soul is in the
      body, or a pure spirit in space.

    We know from Revelation that the Body of our Lord exists in this way
      in the Eucharist. We know, too, from Revelation that after the
      general resurrection the glorified bodies of the just will be _real_
      bodies, real _corporeal substances_, and nevertheless that they will
      be endowed with properties very different from those which they
      possess in the present state: that they will be immortal,
      incorruptible, impassible, “spiritual” (_cf._   Cor. xv.). The
      Catholic philosopher who adds those scattered rays of revealed light
      to what his own rational analysis of experience tells him about
      matter and spirit, will understand the possibility of such a kinship
      between the latter as will make the fact of their union in his own
      nature and person not perhaps any less wonderful, but at any rate a
      little less surprising and inscrutable: and this without committing
      himself to the objective idealism whereby Berkeley, while
      endeavouring to show the utter unreality of matter, only succeeded
      in persuading himself that its reality was not independent of all
      mind.

    “Ὥστε τὸ τοῦ περιέχοντος πέρας ἀκίνητον πρῶτον, τουτ᾽ ἔστιν ὁ
      τόπος.”—_Physic_, L. iv., ch. iv. ( ).

    The category _Situs_ is commonly interpreted to signify the _mutual_
      spatial relations or dispositions of the various parts of a body in
      the place actually occupied by the latter.

    A body deprived of its connatural extension exists in space in a
      manner analogous to that in which the soul is in the body. The Body
      of our Divine Lord is in the Eucharist in this
      manner—“_sacramentaliter_”.

_    Cf._ KLEUTGEN, _op. cit._, §  .

_    Cf._ ZIGLIARA, _Ontologia_ ( ), iv.

_    Cf._ NYS, _La Notion d’Espace_ (Louvain,  ), pp.   _sqq._—_La
      Notion de Temps_ (Louvain,  ), pp.   _sqq._

    “Quid est ergo tempus? Si nemo ex me quaerat, scio; si quaerenti
      explicare velim, nescio.”—_Confess_. L. xi., ch. xiv.

    “Cum enim intelligimus extrema diversa alicujus medii, et anima
      dicat, illa esse duo _nunc_, hoc _prius_, illud _posterius_ quasi
      numerando _prius_ et _posterius_ in motu, tunc hoc dicimus esse
      tempus.”—ST. THOMAS, in _Phys._, L. iv. lect.  a.

_    Sentent._, Dist. xix., q. ii., art.  .—_Cf._ Lect. xxiii. in iv.
      _Physic._

_    Physic._, iv., ch. xi.—_Cf._ ST. THOMAS _in loc_.

    “The conception of variation united with sameness is not, however,
      the whole cognition of time. For this the mind must be able to
      combine in thought two different movements or pulsations of
      consciousness, so as to represent an interval between them. It must
      hold together two _nows_, conceiving them, in succession, yet
      uniting them through that intellectual synthetic activity by which
      we _enumerate_ a collection of objects—a process or act which
      carries concomitantly the consciousness of its own continuous
      unity.”—MAHER, _Psychology_, ch. xvii.

    That is, provided we abstract from all comparison of this internal
      time duration with that of any other current of conscious
      experiences in the estimating mind. As a matter of fact we always
      and necessarily compare the time duration of any particular
      experienced change with that of the remaining portion of the whole
      current of successive conscious states which make up our mental
      life. And thus we feel, not that the four-mile walk had a longer
      time duration than the three-mile walk, but rather that it took
      place at a quicker _rate_, more rapidly, than the latter. But if a
      mind which had no other consciousness of change whatsoever than,
      _e.g._ that of the two walks experienced successively, no other
      standard change with which to compare each of them as it occurred—if
      such a mind experienced each in this way, would it pronounce the
      four-mile walk to have occupied a longer time than the three-mile
      walk?—_Cf._ _infra_, p.  .

    This is true on the assumption that the intrinsic _time-duration_ of
      a successive, continuous change, its divisibility into distinct
      “nows” related as “before” and “after,” is _really identical with_
      the continuous, successive _states constituting the change_ itself,
      and is not _a really distinct mode_ superadded to this change, a
      continuous series of “_quandocationes_,” distinct from the change,
      and giving the latter its temporal duration. But many philosophers
      hold that in all creatures _duration_ is a mode of their existence
      really distinct from the creatures themselves that have this
      duration or continued existence.—_Cf._ _infra_, §  .

_    Cf._ _Science of Logic_, ii., §  , pp.   _sqq._

_    op. cit._, c. xvii.

_    op. cit._, c. xvii.

_    Cf._ NYS, _La Notion de Temps_ (Lovain,  ), p.  .

    The fact that we can perceive and estimate temporal duration only
      _extrinsically_, and in ultimate analysis by comparison with the
      flow of our own conscious states, and that therefore we can have no
      perception or conception of the intrinsic time duration of any
      change, seems to have been overlooked by DE SAN _(Cosmologia_, pp.
       - ) when he argues from our perception of different _rates_ of
      motion, in favour of the view that time _duration_ is not really
      identical with motion or change, but a superadded mode, really
      distinct from the latter.

_    Cf._ NYS, _La Notion de Temps_, pp.   _sqq._

_    Cf._ NYS, _op. cit._, pp.   _sqq._, for a defence of the view
      that an actually infinite multitude involves no contradiction.

_    ibid._, pp.  - .

_    De Consolatione_, L. v., _pr. ult._

_    Cf._ KLEUTGEN, _op. cit._, §  .

    “Est ergo dicendum, quod, cum aeternitas sit mensura esse
      permanentis secundum quod aliquid recedit a permanentia essendi,
      secundum hoc recedit ab aeternitate. Quaedam autem sic recedunt a
      permanentia essendi, quod esse eorum est subjectum transmutationis,
      vel in transmutatiose consistit; et hujusmodi mensurantur _tempore_,
      sicut omnis motus, et etiam esse omnium corruptibilium. Quaedam vero
      recedunt minus a permanentia essendi, quia esse eorum nec in
      transmutatione consistit nec est subjectum transmutationis; tamen
      habent transmutationem adjunctam vel in actu vel in potentia ...
      patet de angelis, quod scilicet habent esse intransmutabile cum
      transmutabilitate secundum electionem, quantum ad eorum naturam
      pertinet, et cum transmutabilitate intelligentiarum, et affectionum,
      et locorum suo modo. Et ideo hujusmodi mensurantur _aevo_, quod est
      medium inter aeternitatem et tempus. Esse autem quod mensurat
      _aeternitas_, nec est mutabile nec mutabilitati adjunctum. Sic ergo
      tempus habet prius et posterius, aevum non habet in se prius et
      posterius, sed ei conjungi possunt; aeternitas autem non habet prius
      neque posterius, neque ea compatitur.”—ST. THOMAS, _Summa Theol._,
      i., q. x., art.  , in c.

    pp.  - .

_    Invisibilia enim ipsius a creatura mundi, per ea quae facta sunt
      intellecta, conspiciuntur, sempiterna quoque ejus virtus et
      divinitas, ita ut [qui veritatem Dei in injustitia detinent] sint
      inexcusabiles._—Rom. ii.   [ ].

_    Cf._ MAHER, _Psychology_ ( th edit.), pp.  - .

    For a clear and trenchant criticism of modern relativist theories,
      _cf._ VEITCH, _Knowing and Being_, especially ch. iv., “Relation,”
      pp.   _sqq._

_    Cf._ MERCIER, _op. cit._, §§  - .

_    Principles of Psychology_, P. ii., ch. iii., §  .

_    Cf._ MAHER, _Psychology_, pp.  - .

    “We cannot of course _perceive_ an _unperceived_ world, nor can we
      conceive a world the conception of which is not in the mind; but
      there is no contradiction or absurdity in the proposition: ‘A
      material world of three dimensions has existed for a time
      unperceived and unthought of by any created being, and then revealed
      itself to human minds’.”—MAHER, _Psychology_, p. iii, n.

    “I do not pretend to demonstrate anything, nor do I feel much
      concern, about any unknowable _noumenon_ which never reveals itself
      in my consciousness. If there be in existence an inscrutable
      ‘transcendental Ego,’ eternally screened from my ken by this
      self-asserting ‘empirical Ego,’ I confess I feel very little
      interest in the nature or the welfare of the former. _The only soul
      about which I care is that which immediately presents itself in its
      acts, which thinks, wills, remembers, believes, loves, repents, and
      hopes._”—MAHER, _op. cit._, p.  . _Cf._ MERCIER, _op. cit._, §
       , pp.  .

    Πρός τι δὲ τὰ τοιαῦτα λέγεται, ὅσα αὐτά, ἄπερ ἐστὶν, ἑτέρων εἶναι
      λέγεται, ἢ ὁπωσοῦν ἄλλως πρὸς ἕτερον.—_Categ._ v.  .

    I _Sentent._, Dist. xxvi., q.  , art.  .

    “Sicut realis relatio consistit in ordine rei ad rem, ita relatio
      rationis consistit in ordine intellectuum [ordination of concepts];
      quod quidem dupliciter potest contingere. Uno modo secundum quod
      iste ordo est adinventus per intellectum, et attributus ei, quod
      relative dicitur; et hujusmodi sunt relationes quae attribuuntur ab
      intellectu rebus intellectis, prout sunt intellectae, sicut relatio
      generis et speciei; has enim relationes ratio adinvenit considerando
      ordinem ejus, quod est in intellectu ad res, quae sunt extra, vel
      etiam ordinem intellectuum ad invicem. Alio modo secundum quod
      hujusmodi relationes consequuntur modum intelligendi, videlicet quod
      intellectus intelligit aliquid in ordine ad aliud; licet illum
      ordinem intellectus non adinveniat, sed magis ex quadam necessitate
      consequatur modum intelligendi. Et hujusmodi relationes intellectus
      non attribuit ei, quod est in intellectu, sed ei, quod est in re. Et
      hoc quidem contingit secundum quod aliqua non habentia secundum se
      ordinem, ordinate intelliguntur; licet intellectus non intelligit ea
      habere ordinem, quia sic esset falsus. Ad hoc autem quod aliqua
      habeant ordinem, oportet quod utrumque sit ens, et utrumque
      ordinabile ad aliud. Quandoque autem intellectus accipit aliqua duo
      ut entia, quorum alterum tantum vel neutrum est ens; sicut cum
      accipit duo futura, vel unum praesens et aliud futurum, et
      intelligit unum cum ordine ad aliud, dicit alterum esse prius
      altero; unde istae relationes sunt rationis tantum, utpote modum
      intelligendi consequentes. Quandoque vero accipit unum ut duo, et
      intelligit ea cum quodam ordine; sicut cum dicitur aliquid esse idem
      sibi: et sic talis relatio est rationis tantum. Quandoque vero
      accipit aliqua duo ut ordinabilia ad invicem, inter quae non est
      ordo medius, immo alterum ipsorum essentialiter est ordo; sicut cum
      dicit relationem accidere subjecto; unde talis relatio relationis ad
      quodcumque aliud est rationis tantum. Quandoque vero accipit aliquid
      cum ordine ad aliud, inquantum est terminus ordinis alterius ad
      ipsum, licet ipsum non ordinetur ad aliud: sicut accipiendo scibile
      ut terminum ordinis scientiae ad ipsum.”—_De Potentia_, q. vii.,
      art.  ; _cf._ _ibid._ art.  .

      “Cum relatio requirit duo extrema, tripliciter se habet ad hoc quod
      sit res naturae aut rationis. Quandoque enim ex utraque parte est
      res rationis tantum, quando scilicet ordo vel habitudo non potest
      esse inter aliqua nisi secundum apprehensionem intellectus tantum,
      utpote cum dicimus idem eidem idem. Nam secundum quod ratio
      apprehendit bis aliquod unum statuit illud ut duo; et sic
      apprehendit quandam habitudinem ipsius ad seipsum. Et similiter est
      de omnibus relationibus quae sunt inter ens et non ens, quas format
      ratio, inquantum apprehendit non ens ut quoddam extremum. Et idem
      est de omnibus relationibus quae consequuntur actum rationis, ut
      genus, species, et hujusmodi....”—_Summa Theol._, i., q. xiii., art.
       .

_    Summa Theol._, . q. xiii. art.  . Elsewhere he points the
      distinction in these terms: “Respectus ad aliud aliquando est in
      ipsa natura rerum, utpote quando aliquae res secundum suam naturam
      ad invicem ordinatae sunt, et ad invicem inclinationem habent; et
      hujusmodi relationes oportet esse reales.... Aliquando vero
      respectus significatus per ea, quae dicuntur _Ad aliquid_, est
      tantum in ipsa apprehensione rationis conferentis unum alteri; et
      tunc est relatio rationis tantum, sicut cum comparat ratio hominem
      animali, ut speciem ad genus.”—_ibid._, q. xxviii., art.  .

    St. Thomas gives expression to it in these sentences: “Perfectio et
      bonum quae sunt in rebus extra animam, non solum attenduntur
      secundum aliquid absolute inhaerens rebus, sed etiam secundum
      ordinem unius rei ad aliam; sicut etiam in ordine partium exercitus,
      bonum exercitus consistit: huic enim ordini comparat Philosophus
      [Aristot., xii. (x.) _Metaph._, Comment.   _sqq._] ordinem
      universi. Oportet, ergo in ipsis rebus ordinem quemdam esse; hic
      autem ordo relatio quaedam est.... Sic ergo oportet quod res
      habentes ordinem ad aliquid, realiter referantur ad ipsum, et quod
      in eis aliqua res sit relatio.”—_QQ. Disp. De Potentia_, q. vii.,
      art.  .

_    Kritik der reinen Vernunft_, bk. i., Hauptst. ii., Abschn. ii., §
       .

_    Logic_, bk. i., ch. iii., §  .

_    L’Idée du phénomène_, p.  —_apud_ MERCIER, _op. cit._, §  .

    “Quaedam vero relationes sunt quantum ad utrumque extremum res
      naturae, quando scilicet est habitudo inter aliqua duo secundum
      aliquid realiter conveniens utrique; sicut patet de omnibus
      relationibus quae consequuntur quantitatem, ut magnum et parvum,
      duplum et dimidium, et hujusmodi; nam quantitas est in utroque
      extremorum: et simile est de relationibus quae consequuntur actionem
      et passionem, ut motivum et mobile, pater et filius, et
      similia.”—ST. THOMAS, _Summa Theol._, i., q. xiii., art.  .

    “Quandoque vero relatio in uno extremorum est res naturae, et in
      altero est res rationis tantum: et hoc contingit quandocunque duo
      extrema non sunt unius ordinis; sicut sensus et scientia referuntur
      ad sensibile et scibile; quae quidem, inquantum sunt res quaedam in
      esse naturale existentes, sunt extra ordinem esse sensibilis et
      intelligibilis. Et ideo in scientia quidem et sensu est relatio
      realis, inquantum ordinantur ad sciendum vel sentiendum res; sed res
      ipsae in se consideratae sunt extra ordinem hujusmodi; unde in eis
      non est aliqua relatio realiter ad scientiam et sensum, sed secundum
      rationem tantum, inquantum intellectus apprehendit ea ut terminos
      relationum scientiae et sensus. Unde Philosophus dicit in   Metaph.,
      text.  , quod non dicuntur relative, eo quod ipsa referantur ad
      alia, sed quia alia referantur ad ipsa.”—_ibid._

    Being really and adequately identical with its foundation, which is
      the essence of its subject, this relation does not necessarily need
      the _actual_ existence of its term. Thus actual knowledge or
      science, which is a habit of the mind, has a transcendental relation
      to its object even though this latter be not actual but only a pure
      possibility. Similarly the accident of quantity sustained without
      its connatural substance in the Eucharist, retains its
      transcendental relation to the latter.—_Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, §
        (p.  ).

_    Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, §   (p.  ).

_    Metaph._, L. v., ch. xv. _Cf._ ST. THOMAS, _in loc._, lect.  ,
      where, approving of this triple division, he writes: “Cum enim
      relatio quae est in rebus, consistat in ordine unius rei ad aliam,
      oportet tot modis hujusmodi relationes esse, quot modis contingit
      unam rem ad aliam ordinari. Ordinatur autem una res ad aliam, vel
      secundum esse, prout esse unius rei dependet ab alia, et sic est
      tertius modus. Vel secundum virtutem activam et passivam, secundum
      quod una res ab alia recipit, vel alteri confert aliquid; et sic est
      secundus modus. Vel secundum quod quantitas unius rei potest
      mensurari per aliam; et sic est primus modus.”

_    Cf._ MERCIER, _op. cit._, §  . For transcendental and
      predicamental unity, _cf._ _supra_, §§  ,  .

_    Cf._ _infra_, p.  . Some authors hold that the relation in
      question is predicamental. _Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, p.  . The
      nature or essence of any individual would seem to imply in its very
      concept a transcendental relation of specific identity with all
      other actual and possible individual embodiments of this essence.
      The point is one of secondary importance.

    Even virtually, though not formally. The creative act is not
      formally transitive; it is virtually so: and in the creature it
      grounds the latter’s relation of real dependence on the Creator.

    Cf. URRABURU, _op. cit._, §   (p.  ), §   (p.  ); ST.
      THOMAS, iii. _Sentent._, Dist., viii., q. i., art.  .

    MERCIER, _op. cit._, §  .

    MERCIER, _ibid._

    “Cum igitur Deus sit extra totum ordinem creaturae, et omnes
      creaturae ordinentur ad ipsum et non e converso; manifestum est quod
      creaturae realiter, referuntur ad ipsum Deum; sed in Deo non est
      aliqua realis relatio ejus ad creaturas, sed secundum rationem
      tantum, inquantum creaturae referantur ad ipsum.”—ST. THOMAS, _Summa
      Theol._, i., q. xiii., art.  .

    Among others Cajetan, Ferriariensis, Capreolus, Bañez, Joannes a St.
      Thoma. _Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, §   (p.  ); MERCIER, _op.
      cit._, §  . It would be interesting to know how precisely those
      authors conceived this “relative” entity, this “_esse ad_” as a
      reality independent of their own thought-activity. _Cf._ art. by the
      present writer in the _Irish Theological Quarterly_ (vol. vii.,
      April,  : “Reflections on some Forms of Monism,” pp.  - ): “The
      whole universe of direct experience displays a unity of order or
      design which pervades it through and through; it is a revelation of
      intelligent purpose. Now a _Cosmos_, an orderly universe—which is
      intelligible only as the expression of intelligent purpose, and not
      otherwise—is a system of _interrelated_ factors. But _relating_ is
      unintelligible except as an expression of the activity of mind or
      spirit, that is, of something at least analogous to our mental
      activity of comparing and judging. Scholastic philosophers, as we
      know, discuss the question whether or how far the exact object of
      our ‘relation’ concept is real; that is, whether this object is, in
      itself and apart from the terms related [and the foundation], a mere
      _ens rationis_, a product of our thought, or whether it is in itself
      something more than this; and some of them hold that there are
      relations which, in themselves and formally as relations, _are_
      something more than mere products of our thought. Now if there be
      such relations, since they are not products of _our_ thought, we may
      fairly ask: Must they be the product of _some_ thought? And from our
      analysis of our very notion of what a relation is, it would seem
      that they must be in some sort or other a product or expression of
      some thought-activity: even relations between _material_ things. It
      is in determining how precisely this is, or can be, that the theist
      and the monist differ. The theist regards all material things, with
      their real relations—and all our finite human minds, which apprehend
      the material world and its relations and themselves and one
      another—as being indeed in a true sense terms or objects of the
      Thought of God; not, however, as therefore identical or
      consubstantial with the Divine Spirit, but as distinct from It
      though dependent on It: inasmuch as he holds the Divine Thought to
      be creative, and regards all these things as its _created_ terms.
      The kinship he detects between matter and spirit lies precisely in
      this, that matter is for him a created term of the Divine Thought.
      For him too, therefore, matter can have no existence except as a
      term of thought—the creative Thought of God.” Not that “the
      intelligible relations apprehended by us in matter are ... identical
      in reality with the thought-activity of the Divine Mind,” as
      Ontologists have taught [_cf._ _supra_,  ,  ,  ]; nor that we can
      directly infer the existence of a Supreme Spirit from the existence
      of matter, as Berkeley tried to do by erroneously regarding the
      latter merely as an essentially mind-dependent phenomenon; because
      “for the orthodox theist matter is in its own proper nature not
      spiritual, mental, psychical; not anything after the manner of a
      thought-process, or endowed with the spirit-mode of being”. If
      predicamental relations, such as _quality_ or _similarity_ of
      material things, are, as those medieval scholastics contended, real
      entities, “relative” in their nature, and really distinct from their
      extremes and foundations, did those scholastics conceive such
      “relative entities” as essentially mind-dependent entities? If they
      did they would probably have conceived them in the sense of
      Berkeley, as created terms of the Divine Thought, rather than in the
      Ontologist sense which would identify them with the Divine Thought
      itself. But it is not likely that they conceived such relative
      entities as essentially thought-dependent, any more than the
      absolute material realities related to one another by means of these
      relative entities. On the other hand it is not easy to see how such
      relative entities can be anything more than mere products of some
      thought-activity or other.

    They rely especially on this text from the _De Potentia_ (q. vii.,
      art.  ): “Relatio est debilioris esse inter omnia praedicamenta;
      ideo putaverunt quidam eam esse ex secundis intellectibus. Secundum
      ergo hanc positionem sequeretur quod relatio non sit in rebus extra
      animam sed in solo intellectu, sicut intentio generis et speciei, et
      secundarum substantiarum. Hoc autem esse non potest. In nullo enim
      praedicamento ponitur aliquid nisi res praeter animam existens. Nam
      ens rationis dividitur contra ens divisum per decem
      praedicamenta.... Si autem relatio non est in rebus extra animam non
      poneretur _ad aliquid_ unum genus praedicamenti.”

_    Cf._ ST. ANSELM, _Monolog._, ch. xxvi.

    “Relatio habet quod sit res naturae ex sua causa per quam una res
      naturalem ordinem habet ad alteram.”—_Quodl._  , art.  .

    “In hoc differt _Ad Aliquid_ [_i.e._ Relation] ab aliis generibus;
      quod alia genera ex propria sui ratione habent, quod aliquid sint,
      sicut quantitas ex hoc ipso quod est quantitas, aliquid ponit: et
      similiter est de aliis. Sed _Ad Aliquid_ ex propria sui generis
      ratione non habet, quod ponat aliquid, sed ad aliquid.... Habet
      autem relatio quod sit aliquid reale ex eo, quod relationem
      causat.”—_Quodl._  , art.  . _Cf._ _De Potentia_, q. ii., art.  .

    “Relatio est aliquid inhaerens _licet non ex hoc ipso quod est
      relatio_.... Et ideo nihil prohibet, _quod esse desinat hujusmodi
      accidens sine mutatione ejus in quo est_.”—_De Potentia_, q. vii.,
      art.  , ad.  .

    “Et utroque modo contingit in realibus relationibus destrui
      relationem: vel per destructionem quantitatis [or other foundation],
      unde ad hanc mutationem quantitatis sequitur per accidens mutatio
      relationis: vel etiam secundum quod cessat respectus ad alterum,
      _remoto illo ad quod referebatur_; et tunc _relatio cessat, nulla
      mutatione facta in ipsa_. Unde in illis in quibus non est relatio
      nisi secundum hunc respectum, _veniunt et recedunt relationes sine
      aliqua mutatione ejus, quod refertur_.”—In i. _Sent._, Dist. xxvi.,
      q. ii., art.  , ad.  .

    “Relationes differunt in hoc ab omnibus aliis rerum generibus, quia
      ea quae sunt aliorum generum, ex ipsa ratione sui generis habent,
      quod sint res naturae, sicut quantitates ex ratione quantitatis, et
      qualitates ex ratione qualitatis. Sed relationes non habent quod
      sint res naturae ex ratione respectus ad alterum.... Sed relatio
      habet quod sit res naturae ex sua causa, per quam una res naturalem
      ordinem habet ad alteram, qui quidem ordo naturalis et realis est
      ipsis ipsa relatio.”—_Quodl._,  , art.  .

_    Cf._ _supra_, p.  , n.  ; in which context we may reasonably
      suppose him to be arguing that relation _considered adequately_ is
      not a _mere logical entity_, “ex secundis intellectibus,” inasmuch
      as, having _a real foundation_ in things outside the mind, it is in
      this respect real, independently of our thought.

_    Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, §   (p.  ).

_    ibid._, p.  ; _cf._ _supra_, p.  .

    In i. _Sentent._, Dist. iv., q.  , art.  , ad.  .

_    Cf._ URRABURU, _ibid._, pp.  - : “Deinde _nullam relationem esse
      substantiam_ scripsit [S. Thomas] vel quia plerumque ratio fundandi
      non est substantia ... vel potius quia semper relatio, etiam cum in
      substantia fundatur, aliquid addit supra substantiam cujuslibet
      extremi relati singillatim sumpti, quia non identificatur cum
      fundamento prout se tenet ex parte solius subjecti, vel solius
      termini, sed prout se tenet ea parte utriusque. Quare relatio ...
      semper exprimit denominationem contingentem et accidentaliter
      supervenientem subjecto, utpote quae adesse vel abesse potest, prout
      adsit vel deficiat terminus.”

    “Illi enim [the reference is to certain medieval idealists] quamvis
      agnoscerent duo alba existentia negabant dari actu in rebus formalem
      similaritatem [_i.e._ even after the comparative activity of
      thought], sed formalem similitudinem, et aliam quamvis relationem,
      reponebant in actu intellectus unum cum alio comparantis; nos vero
      ante actum intellectus agnoscimus in rebus, quidquid sufficit ad
      constituendam relationem similitudinis, diversitatis, paternitatis,
      etc., ita ut hujusmodi denominationes non verificentur de actu
      intellectus unum cum alio comparantis, sed plenam habeant in rebus
      ipsis verificationem.”—URRABURU, _op. cit._, p.  .

    In what sense “extramental”?—_Cf._ _supra_, p.  , n.   (end).

_    Cf._ _Science of Logic_, ii., §  . For the concepts of “cause”
      and “causality” in the inductive sciences, as well as for much that
      cannot be repeated here, the student may consult with advantage vol.
      ii., p. iv., ch. iii., iv. and vi. of the work referred to.

    “Id a quo aliquid procedit quocunque modo.”—ST. THOMAS, _Summa
      Theol._, i., q. xxxiii., art.  .

    Hence Aristotle’s definition of principle, including both logical
      and real principles: Πασῶν μὲν οὖν κοινὸν τῶν ἀρχῶν τὸ πρῶτον εἶναι
      ὅθεν ἡ ἐστιν ἢ γίγνεται ἢ γιγνώσκεται.—_Metaph._ IV., ch. i.

    A _cause_ must be prior _in nature_ to its effect, but not
      necessarily prior _in time_. In fact the _action_ of the cause and
      the _production_ of the effect must be simultaneous. _Cf._ _Science
      of Logic_, ii., §  . Considered formally as correlatives they are
      _simul natura_. A _principle_ must likewise be in some sense _prior_
      to what proceeds from it, not necessarily, however, by priority of
      time, nor by priority of nature involving real dependence. The
      Christian Revelation regarding the Blessed Trinity involves that the
      First Divine Person is the “principle” from which the Second
      proceeds, and the First and the Second the “principle” from which
      the Third proceeds; yet here there is no dependence or inequality,
      or any priority except the “relation of origin” be called priority.

_    Cf._ _Science of Logic_, ii., §  .

_    Cf._ _Science of Logic_, i., §  ; ii., §§  ,   (p.  ).

_    Cf._ MERCIER, _op. cit._, §  .

_    Cf._ _Physic._, Lib. ii., cap.  ; _Metaph._, Lib. i., cap.  ; v.,
      cap.  .

_    i.e._ from the effect considered _formally_ as a term of the
      activity; in the case of _immanent_ activity, as, _e.g._ thought or
      volition, where the effect remains within the agent (as a _verbum
      mentale_ or other mental term), uniting with the concrete reality of
      the latter, the effect is not adequately distinct from the agent as
      affected by this term or product.

_    Cf._ ST. THOMAS, _In Physic._, ii., lect.  : “Necesse est quatuor
      esse causas: quia cum causa sit, ad quam sequitur esse alterius,
      esse ejus quod habet causam potest considerari dupliciter: uno modo
      absolute, et sic causa essendi est forma per quam aliquid est ens in
      actu; alio modo secundum quod de potentia ente fit actu ens: et quia
      omne quod est in potentia, reducitur ad actum per id quod est actu
      ens, ex hoc necesse est esse duas alias causas, scilicet materiam,
      et agentem quod reducit materiam de potentia in actum. Actio autem
      agentis ad aliquod determinatum tendit, sicut ab aliquo determinato
      principio procedit; nam omne agens agit quod est sibi conveniens. Id
      autem ad quod intendit actio agentis dicitur causa finalis. Sic
      igitur necesse est esse causas quatuor.”

_    Cf._ MERCIER, _op. cit._, §§  - .

    Certain medieval scholastics, especially of the Franciscan School,
      regarded spiritual substances as having in their constitution a
      certain potential, determinable principle, which they called
      “_materia_”. St. Thomas, without objecting to the designation,
      insisted that such potential principle cannot be the same as the
      _materia prima_ of corporeal substances (_cf._ _De Substantis
      Separatis_, ch. vii.).

_    Cf._ ST. THOMAS: “Actio est actus activi _et passio est actus
      passivi_” (iii. _Physic._, l.  ); “_Materia_ non fit _causa in actu_
      nisi _secundum quod alteratur et mutatur_” (i. _Contra Gentes_,
      xvii.); “Materia est causa formae, inquantum forma non est nisi in
      materia” (_De Princip. Naturae_).

_    Cf._ ST. THOMAS, _De Princip. Naturae_, _ibid._: “... et similiter
      forma est causa materiae, inquantum materia non habet esse in actu
      nisi per formam; materia enim et forma dicuntur relative ad invicem;
      dicuntur etiam relative ad compositum, sicut pars ad totum”.

    “Materia cum sit infinitarum formarum determinatur per formam, et
      per eam consequitur aliquam speciem.”—ST. THOMAS, _Summa Theol._,
      i., q. vii., art.  .

    To Special Metaphysics also belongs the controverted question
      whether or not a plurality of really distinct substantial forms can
      enter into the constitution of an individual corporeal substance.
      When we classify corporeal things into _genera_ and _species_
      according to their _natural kinds_ (_cf._ _Science of Logic_, i., §
       ), these latter are determined by the _formae substantiales_ of
      the things classified, and are called _infimæ species_. Numerically
      distinct individuals which have (conceptually) the same _forma
      substantialis_, fall into the same _infima species_; while if such
      individuals have (conceptually and numerically) distinct _formae
      substanialis_ they fall into distinct _infimae species_ of some
      higher common genus. The wider the generic concept the larger the
      group of individuals which it unifies: it is a principle of
      conceptual unity, _i.e._ of universality. The objects of our
      _generic_, _differential_, and _specific_ concepts, throughout this
      process of classification, are only virtually distinct metaphysical
      grades of being in the individuals. Now if the _forma substantialis_
      which yields the unifying concept of the _species infima_ for the
      individuals, and the material principle which is the ground of the
      numerical distinction between these latter, were likewise regarded
      by the scholastics as being merely virtually distinct metaphysical
      grades of being, in each individual, then the question of a
      plurality of really distinct forms in one and the same individual
      would have no meaning: all “forms” in the latter would be only
      virtually distinct from one another and from the material principle.
      But the scholastics did not conceive that the real ground for
      grouping individuals into _species infimae_ was the same as that for
      grouping these latter into wider genera. They regarded the relation
      between the _forma substantialis_ and the _materia prima_ in the
      individual as quite different from that between the generic and
      specific grades of being in the individual (_cf._ _supra_, §  ;
      _Science of Logic_, i., §  ; JOSEPH, _Introduction to Logic_, pp.
       - ). While they considered the latter a relation of virtual
      distinction they held the former to be one of real distinction. And
      while they recognized the concept of the _species infima_ to be a
      principle of conceptual unity in grouping the individuals together
      mentally, St. Thomas emphasized especially the rôle of the _forma
      substantialis_ (on which that concept was founded) as a principle of
      _real unity_ in the individual: “Ab eodam habet res _esse_ et
      _unitatem_. Manifestum est autem quod res habet esse per formam.
      Unde et per formam res habet unitatem” (_Quodlib._ i., art.  ). If
      we accept this doctrine of St. Thomas the arguments which he bases
      on it against the possibility of a plurality of distinct substantial
      forms in the same corporeal individual are unanswerable (_Cf._
      MERCIER, _Ontologie_, §  ).

    “Idem actus secundum rem est duorum secundum diversam rationem:
      agentis quidem, secundum quod est ab eo, patientis autem, secundum
      quod est in ipso.... Ex eo quod actio et passio sunt unus motus non
      sequitur quod actio et passio, vel doctio et doctrina, sint idem;
      sed quod motus cui inest utrumque eorum, sit idem. Qui quidem motus
      secundum unam rationem est actio, et secundum aliam rationem est
      passio; alterum enim est secundum rationem esse actus hujus, ut _in
      hoc_, et esse actus hujus, ut _ab hoc_; motus autem dicitur actio
      secundum quod est actus agentis ut ab hoc; dicitur autem passio
      secundum quod est actus patientis ut in hoc. Et sic patet quod licet
      motus sit idem moventis et moti, propter hoc quod abstrahit ab
      utraque ratione: tamen actio et passio differunt propter hoc quod
      diversas rationes in sua significatione habent.”—ST. THOMAS, _In
      Phys._, iii.  .  .

    “Solet dubium esse apud quosdam, utrum motus sit in movente, aut in
      mobili.... Sed manifestum est quod actus cujuslibet est in eo cujus
      est actus; actus autem motus est in mobili, cum sit actus mobilis,
      causatus tamen in eo a movente ... cum motus sit actus existentis in
      potentia, sequitur quod motus non sit actus alicujus inquantum est
      movens, sed inquantum est mobile.”—_ibid._,  .  .

    Some languages mark the distinction between these two kinds of
      action: “Differt autem _facere_ et _agere_: quia _factio_ est actio
      transiens in exteriorem materiam, sicut aedificare, secare et
      hujusmodi; _agere_ autem est actio permanenslin ipso agente sicut
      videre, velle et hujusmodi.”—ST. THOMAS, _Summa Theol._ iae iia, q.
      lxvii., art.  , c.

    Hume went even farther, at least in language; for he alleged
      (whether he really believed is another question) that he could
      overcome the supposed merely psychological difficulty, that he could
      easily—and, presumably, without doing violence to his rational
      nature—conceive a non-existent thing as coming into existence
      without a cause! He proclaimed that he could achieve the feat of
      thinking what the universal voice of mankind has declared to be
      unthinkable: _an absolute beginning of being from nothingness_. “The
      knowledge of this relation (causality) is not,” he writes, “in any
      instance attained by reasonings _a priori_; but arises entirely from
      experience, when we find that any particular objects are _constantly
      conjoined_ with each other ”(_Works_, ed. Green and Grose, iv.,  ).
      “All distinct ideas are separable from each other, and, as the ideas
      of cause and effect are evidently distinct, ’twill be easy for us
      (!) to conceive any object as nonexistent this moment, and existent
      the next, without conjoining to it the distinct idea of a cause or
      producing principle” (_Treatise on Human Nature_, p.  ). On this
      argument (?) even such an ardent admirer of the pan-phenomenist as
      Huxley was, is forced to remark that “it is of the circular sort,
      for the major premise, that all distinct ideas are separable in
      thought, assumes the question at issue” (HUXLEY’S _Hume_, p.  ).

    Thus, for instance, man, elevated by sanctifying grace, can perform
      acts which merit the supernatural reward of the Beatific Vision.

_    Cf._ _Science of Logic_, ii., §  .

_    Cf._ ARISTOTLE, _Metaph._, ii., cap.  .

_    Cf._ URRABURU, _op. cit._, §   (p.  ): “Unde adaequata virtus
      instrumentalis videtur conflari ex naturali instrumenti virtute vel
      efficacitate et ex virtute causae principalis sibi transeunter
      addita, docente S. Thoma: _Instrumentum virtutem instrumentalem
      acquirit dupliciter scilicet quando accipit formam instrumenti et
      quando movetur a principali agente ad effectum_ (_Summa Theol._,
      iii., q. xix., art.  , ad.  ).”

    “Ad aliquem effectum aliquid operatur dupliciter. Uno modo sicut per
      se agens; et dicitur per se agere quod agit per aliquam formam sibi
      inhaerentem per modum naturae completae, sive habeat illam formam a
      se, sive ab alio.... Alio modo aliquid operatur ad effectum aliquem
      instrumentaliter, quod quidem non operatur ad effectum per formam
      sibi inhaerentem, sed solum inquantum est motum a per se agente.
      Haec est ratio instrumenti, inquantum est instrumentum, ut moveat
      motum; unde sicut se habet forma completa ad per se agentem, ita se
      habet motus, quo movetur a principale agente, ad instrumentum, sicut
      serra operatur ad scamnum. Quamvis enim serra habeat aliquam
      actionem quae sibi competit secundum propriam formam, ut dividere;
      tamen aliquem effectum habet qui sibi non competit, nisi inquantum
      est mota ab artifice, scilicet facere rectam incisionem, et
      convenientem formae artis: et sic instrumentum habet duas
      operationes; unam quae competit ei secundam rationem propriam; aliam
      quae competit ei secundam quod est motum a per se agente, quae
      transcendit virtutem propriae formae.”—_De Veritate_, q. xxvii.,
      art.  . It is not clear, however, that St. Thomas regarded these two
      “_operationes_” of the instrumental cause as really distinct, for he
      says that it acts as an instrument (_i.e._ modifies the efficiency
      of the principal cause) only by exercising its own proper function:
      “Omne agens instrumentale exsequitur actionem principalis agentis
      per aliquam operationem propriam, et connaturalem sibi, sicut calor
      naturalis generat carnem dissolvendo et digerendo, et serra operatur
      ad factionem scamni secando” (_Contra Gentes_, ii., ch. xxi.): from
      which he goes on to argue that no creature can act even as an
      instrumental cause _in creating_.—_Cf._ iv. _Sent._, Dist. i., q.
      i., art.  , sol.  .—_De Potentia_, q. iii., art.  .—_Summa Theol._,
      iii., q. lxii., art.  , ad.  .

    St. Thomas, proving the necessity of the Divine _concursus_ for all
      created causes, illustrates the general distinction between a
      _principal_ and an _instrumental_ cause: “Virtus naturalis quae est
      rebus naturalibus in sua institutione collata, inest eis _ut quaedem
      forma habens esse ratum et firmum in natura_. Sed id quod a Deo fit
      in re naturali, quo actualiter agat, est ut intentio sola, habens
      esse quoddam incompletum, per modum quo ... virtus artis [est] in
      instrumento artificis. Sicut ergo securi per artem dari potuit
      acumen, ut esset forma in ea permanens, non autem dari ei potuit
      quod _vis artis_ esset in ea quasi quaedam forma permanens, _nisi
      haberet intellectum_; ita rei naturali potuit conferri virtus
      propria, ut forma in ipsa permanens, non autem _vis qua agit ad
      esse_ ut instrumentum primae causae, _nisi daretur ei quod esset
      universale essendi principium_; nec iterum virtuti naturali conferri
      potuit ut moveret seipsam, nec ut conservaret se in esse: unde sicut
      patet quod instrumento artificis conferri non oportuit quod
      operaretur absque motu artis; ita rei naturali conferri non potuit
      quod operaretur absque operatione divina.”—_QQ. DD. De. Pot._, q.
      iii., art.  .

_    Cf._ MAHER, _Psychology_, ch. xix.—MERCIER, _Psychologie_, ii., ch.
      i. §  .

    For a fuller treatment of this whole subject, _cf._ _Science of
      Logic_, ii., Part iv., chs. iii., iv.; Part v., ch. i.—MAHER,
      _Psychology_, ch. xix., pp.  - .

_    Cf._ NEWMAN, _Grammar of Assent_, Part i., ch. iv., §   ( ), ( ); §
       , remark  .

_    Cf._ _Science of Logic_, ii., §§  ,  ,  .

_    ibid._, §  .

_    ibid._, §  .

_    Introduction to Logic_, pp.  - .

_    Cf._ what was said above ( ) about the causal or extrinsic, as
      distinct from the intrinsic, principle of individuation.

    “Whenever science tries to find the cause not of a particular event,
      such as the French Revolution (whose cause must be as unique as that
      event itself is), but of an event of a kind, such as consumption, or
      commercial crises, it looks in the last resort for a _commensurate_
      cause. What is that exact state or condition of the body, given
      which it must and without which it cannot be in consumption? What
      are those conditions in a commercial community, given which there
      must and without which there cannot be a commercial crisis?”—JOSEPH,
      _op. cit._, p.  . _Cf._ _Science of Logic_, ii., §  .

_    System of Logic_, iii., v., §  .

    For instance: (_a_) The “ontological” or “true” cause, which
      “actually produces” the effect, need not necessarily be the
      “ultimate” cause of the latter. (_b_) A “physical fact” can be the
      cause of another in the sense of being the invariable antecedent (or
      _physical_ cause) of the latter, but not “in that sense alone”; it
      may also be an _efficient_ cause of the latter by exerting an active
      influence on the happening of this latter. (_c_) Whether or not
      efficiency is “a mysterious and most powerful tie,” at any rate it
      does exist between “physical facts” in the universe. (_d_) Its
      analysis reveals not a “supposed necessity of ascending ... to ...
      the true cause, ... which ... produces the effect,” as if the
      proximate causes did not also truly produce the latter; but a real
      necessity of ascending to a First Cause as the source and support
      and complement of the real efficiency of these proximate causes.
      (_e_) A merely _logical_ theory of Induction does not indeed demand
      any inquiry either into the efficiency of natural agencies, or into
      the nature and grounds of the “invariability” or “necessity” or
      “law” whereby these are connected with their effects. But a
      _philosophical_ theory of Induction does imply such inquiries. And
      here phenomenist writers like Mill have laid themselves open to two
      accusations. For while professing merely to abstract from the
      problem of _efficiency_ they have tried equivalently to deny its
      existence by proclaiming it superfluous and insoluble, besides
      consciously or unconsciously misrepresenting it. And similarly, in
      dealing with the _invariability_ of causal sequences in the
      universe, with the _necessary_ character of its physical laws, they
      have misconceived this necessity as being mechanical, fatal,
      absolutely inviolable; and have wrongly proclaimed its ultimate
      grounds to be unknowable (Agnosticism). Cf. _infra_, §  ; _Science
      of Logic_, ii., Part IV., chs. iii., iv., and v.; Part V., ch. i.
      Thus, while eschewing the genuine Metaphysics, which seeks the real
      nature and causes of the world of our experience, as superfluous and
      futile, they have substituted for it a masked and spurious
      metaphysics which they have wrongly fathered on Physical Science: a
      mass of more or less superficial speculations which have not even
      the merit of consistency. No philosopher, starting with their views
      on the nature of the human mind, can consistently claim for the
      latter any really valid or reliable knowledge of _laws_, any more
      than of causes. For the knowledge of a _law_, even as a
      _generalized_ fact, is a knowledge that claims to pass beyond the
      limits of the individual’s present and remembered experiences. But
      there can be no rational justification, whether psychological or
      ontological, for the certain reliability of such a step, in the
      philosophy which logically reduces all certain knowledge to the mere
      awareness of a flow of successive sensations supposed to constitute
      the total content of the individual consciousness and the total
      reality of human experience.

_    Cf._ MAHER, _Psychology_, ch. xvii., pp.  - .—MERCIER, _op.
      cit._, §  .

    “When an _effort_ of attention combines two ideas, when one billiard
      ball moves another, when a steam hammer flattens out a lump of solid
      iron, when a blow on the head knocks a man down, in all these cases
      there is something more than, and essentially different from, the
      mere _sequence_ of two phenomena: there is _effective force_—_causal
      action_ of an agent endowed with _real energy_.”—MAHER, _op. cit._,
      _ibid._, p.  .

_    Grammar of Assent_, p.  .

_    Cf._ DOMET DE VORGES, _Cause efficiente et cause finale_, p.  .
      Volitional activity is no doubt the most prominent type of efficient
      causality in our mental life. But it is not the only type; we have
      direct conscious experience of intellectual effort, of the work of
      the imagination, of the exercise of organic and muscular energy.
      There is no warrant therefore for conceiving all efficient power or
      energy, after the model of will-power, as Newman among others
      appears to have done when he wrote in these terms: “Starting, then,
      from experience, I consider a cause to be an effective will: and by
      the doctrine of causation, I mean the notion, or first principle,
      that all things come of effective will” (_ibid._, p.  ). No doubt,
      all things do come ultimately from the effective will of God. This,
      however, is not a first principle, but a remote philosophical
      conclusion.

_    ibid._, p.  .

    ST. THOMAS, _QQ. Disp. De Potentia_, q. iii., art.  , in c.

    “Nulla res per seipsam movet vel agit, nisi sit movens non motum....
      Et quia natura inferior agens non agit nisi mota ... et hoc non
      cessat quousque perveniatur ad Deum, sequitur de necessitate quod
      Deus sit causa actionis cujuslibet rei naturalis, ut movens et
      applicans virtutem ad agendum.”—ST. THOMAS, _De Potentia Dei_, q.
      iii., art.  .

    This is the principle repeatedly expressed by ST. THOMAS: “Unde
      quarto modo unum est causa alterius, sicut principale agens est
      causa actionis instrumenti: et hoc modo etiam oportet dicere, quod
      Deus est causa omnis actionis rei naturalis. Quanto enim aliqua
      causa est altior, tanto est communior et efficacior, tanto
      profundius ingreditur in effectum, et de remotiori potentia ipsum
      reducit in actum. In qualibet autem re naturali invenimus _quod est
      ens_ et quod est res naturalis, et quod est talis vel talis naturae.
      Quorum primum est commune omnibus entibus; secundum omnibus rebus
      naturalibus; tertium in una specie; et quartum, si addamus
      accidentia, est proprium huic individuo. Hoc ergo individuum agendo
      non potest constituere aliud in simili specie, nisi prout est
      instrumentum illius causae _quae respicit totam speciem_ et ulterius
      _totum esse_ naturae inferioris. Et propter hoc nihil agit in
      speciem in istis inferioribus ... nec aliquid agit _ad esse_ nisi
      per virtutem Dei. _Ipsum enim esse est communissimus effectus,
      primus et intimior omnibus aliis effectibus; et ideo soli Deo
      competit secundum virtutem propriam talis effectus_: unde etiam, ut
      dicitur in _Lib. de Causis_ (prop.  ), intelligentia non dat esse,
      nisi prout est in ea virtus divina. Sic ergo Deus est causa omnis
      actionis prout quodlibet agens est instrumentum divinae virtutis
      operantis.”—ST. THOMAS, _De Potentia Dei_, q. iii. art  .—_Cf._
      _supra_,   (_c_), p.  , n.  .

    Why, then, is a finite cause not capable of acting uninterruptedly?
      why are its powers, forces, energies, fatigued, lessened, exhausted
      by exercise? Simply because its action is proportionate to its
      powers, and these to its _finite_ nature.

    “Creatio non est mutatio nisi secundum modum intelligendi tantum.
      Nam de ratione mutationis est quod aliquid idem se habeat aliter
      nunc et prius.... Sed in creatione, per quam producitur tota
      substantia rei, non potest accipi aliquid idem aliter se habens nunc
      et prius, nisi secundum intellectum tantum; sicut si intelligatur
      aliqua res prius non fuisse totaliter, et postea esse. Sed cum actio
      et passio conveniant in una substantia motus, et differant solum
      secundum habitudines diveras ... oportet quod subtracto motu, non
      remaneant nisi diversae habitudines in creante et creato. Sed quia
      modus significandi sequitur modum intelligendi ... creatio
      significatur per modum mutationis; et propter hoc dicitur quod
      creare est ex nihilo aliquid facere; quamvis facere et fieri magis
      in hoc conveniant quam mutare et mutari; quia facere et fieri
      important habitudinem causae ad effectum et effectus ad causam, sed
      mutationem ex consequenti.”—ST. THOMAS, _Summa Theol._, i., q. xlv.,
      art.  , ad.  .

    “Remoto motu, actio nihil aliud importat quam ordinem originis
      [effectus] secundum quod [effectus] a causa aliqua procedit.”—_op.
      cit._, i. q. xli., art.  , ad  .

    The act of the will is, of course, virtually transitive when it
      wills or determines bodily movements.—_Cf._ MAHER, _Psychology_,
      chs. x., xxiii. (pp.  - ).

    At the same time it must be noted that organic vital activity is
      transitive in the sense that no part or member of the organism acts
      upon itself, but only on other parts, in the production of the
      local, quantitative and qualitative changes involved in nutrition.
      It is subject to the inductively established law which seems to
      regulate all _corporeal_ action: that all such action involves
      _reaction_ of the _patiens_ on the _agens_. Mental activity is
      outside this law. Cognitive and appetitive faculties do not react on
      the objects which reduce these faculties to act, thus arousing their
      immanent activity.—_Cf._ MERCIER, _op. cit._, §  .

_    Cf._ MERCIER, _op. cit._

_    Cf._ MAHER, _Psychology_, chs. xiii. and xiv.

_    Cf._ URRABURU: “Vel, si mavis, dic causam efficientem esse causam,
      a qua fit aliquid, vel a quo proprie oritur actio, intelligendo per
      actionem emanationem et fluxum ac dependentiam effectus a
      causa.”—_op. cit._, §   (p.  ).

_    Cf._ MERCIER, _op. cit._, §  : “L’action, l’efficience, qu’est
      elle, en quoi consiste-t-elle? Est-ce une sorte d’écoulement de la
      cause dans l’effet? Évidemment non. Lorsque nous voulons nous élever
      à une conception métaphysique, nous nous raccrochons à une image
      sensible, et nous nous persuadons volontiers, que la netteté de la
      première répond à la facilité avec laquelle nous nous figurons la
      seconde. Il faut se défier de cette illusion. Puisque l’action, même
      corporelle, ne modifie point l’agent, la causalité efficiente ne
      peut consister dans un influx physique, qui passerait de la cause
      dans l’effet.”

_    Cf._ _Science of Logic_, ii., §§  - .

    We might add this other fact: that _all_ kinds of corporeal activity
      and change ( ) seem to involve _motion_ or local change. This does
      not prove that they all _are_ motion or local change. The
      significance of the fact lies probably in this, that local motion is
      necessary for procuring and continuing physical contact between the
      interacting physical agencies.—_Cf._ NYS, _Cosmologie_, §§  - .

_    Cf._ ST. THOMAS, _Contra Gentes_, iii.,  .

    “Une cause véritable est une cause, entre laquelle et son effet
      l’esprit aperçoit une liaison nécessaire: c’est ainsi que je
      l’entendes. [This is ambiguous.] Or il n’y a que l’être infiniment
      parfait entre la volonté duquel et les effets l’esprit aperçoive une
      liaison nécessaire. Il n’y a donc que Dieu qui soit véritable cause,
      et il semble même qu’il y ait contradiction à dire que les hommes
      puissent l’être”—_De la récherche de la vérité_, Liv.  me,  e
      partie, ch. iii.

    “Si l’on vient à considérer attentivement l’idée que l’on a de cause
      ou de puissance d’agir, on ne peut en douter que cette idée ne
      présente quelque chose de divin.”—_ibid._

    “Il n’y a point d’homme qui sache seulement ce qu’il faut faire pour
      remuer un de ses doigts par le moyen des esprits animaux.”—_ibid._

    “J’ai toujours soutenue que l’âme était l’unique cause de ses actes,
      c’est à dire de ses déterminations libres ou de ses actes bons ou
      mauvais.... J’ai toujours soutenu que l’âme était active, mais que
      ses actes ne produisaient rien de physique.”—_Réflexions sur la
      prémotion physique_. “Je crois que la volonté est une _puissance
      active_, qu’elle a un véritable pouvoir de se déterminer; mais son
      action est _immanente_; c’est une action qui ne produit rien par son
      efficace propre, pas même le mouvement de son bras.”—_Réponse à la
       __me__ lettre d’Arnauld_.

_    Cf._ MERCIER, _op. cit._, §§  - ; ZIGLIARA, _Ontologia_ ( );
      URRABURU, _op. cit._, §§   _sqq._

    We may reasonably ask the occasionalist to suppose for the moment
      that we are efficient causes of our mental processes and to tell us
      what better proof of it could he demand, or what better proof could
      be forthcoming, than this proof from consciousness.

    MAHER, _Psychology_, ch. x., p.  .

    Should anyone doubt that consciousness does testify to this fact, we
      may prove it inductively from the constant correlation between the
      mental state and the bodily movement: “I will to move my arm, it
      moves; I will that it remain at rest, it does not move; I will that
      its movement be more or less strong and rapid, the strength and
      rapidity vary with the determination of my will. What more complete
      inductive proof can we have of the efficiency of our will-action on
      the external world?”—MERCIER, _op. cit._, §  .

    “Si effectus non producuntur ex actione rerum creatarum, sed solum
      ex actione Dei, impossibile est quod per effectus manifestetur
      virtus alicujus causae creatae: non enim effectus ostendit virtutem
      causae nisi ratione actionis, quae a virtute procedens ad effectum
      terminatur. Natura autem causae non cognoscitur per effectum, nisi
      inquantum per ipsum cognoscitur virtus, quae naturam consequitur. Si
      igitur res creatae non habent actiones ad producendum effectum,
      sequitur, quod nunquam naturam alicujus rei creatae poterit cognosci
      per effectum; et sic subtrahitur nobis omnis cognitio scientiae
      naturalis, in qua praecipuae demonstrationes per effectum
      sequuntur.”—ST. THOMAS, _Contra Gentes_, L. iii., cap.  .

    “Je demeure d’accord que la foi oblige à croire qu’il y a des corps;
      mais, pour l’évidence, il me semble qu’elle n’est point entière, et
      que nous ne sommes point invinciblement portés à croire qu’il y ait
      quelqu’autre chose que Dieu et notre esprit.”—_Récherche de la
      vérite_,  me éclaircissement.

_    Cf._ _Science of Logic_, ii., §  .

_    Metaph._, v.,  .

    “Quaedam vero ad bonum inclinantur cum aliqua cognitione; non quidem
      sic quod cognoscant ipsam rationem boni, sed cognoscunt aliquod
      bonum particulare.... Inclinatio autem hanc cognitionem sequens
      dicitur appetitus _sensitivus_. Quaedam vero inclinantur ad bonum
      cum cognitione qua cognoscant ipsam boni rationem; et haec
      inclinatio dicitur _voluntas_.”—ST. THOMAS, _Summa Theol._, i., q.
      xlix., art.  .

    “Sicut influere causae efficientis est agere, ita influere causae
      finalis est appeti et desiderari.”—_De Veritate_, q. xxii., art.  .

    In its modern usage the term “intention” is inseparable from the
      notion of _conscious_ direction. The scholastics used the term
      “_intentio_” in a _wider_ and _deeper_ sense to connote the natural
      tendency of all created agencies towards their natural activities
      and lines of development. And in unconscious agencies they did not
      hesitate to refer to it as “_intentio naturae_” or “_appetitus
      naturalis_”.

    “Res naturalis per _formam_ qua perficitur in sua specie, habet
      inclinationem in proprias operationes et proprium finem, quem per
      operationes consequitur; quale enim unumquodque est, talia operatur,
      et in sibi convenientia tendit.”—ST. THOMAS, _Contra Gentes_, iv.,
       .

      “Omnia suo modo per appetitum inclinantur in bonum, sed diversimode.
      Quaedam enim inclinantur in bonum per solam naturalem habitudinem
      absque cognitione, sicut plantae et corpora inanimata; et talis
      inclinatio ad bonum vocatur appetitus naturalis.”—_Summa Theol._,
      i., q. xlix., art.  .

    “Causa efficiens et finis sibi correspondent invicem, quia efficiens
      est principium motus, finis autem terminus. Et similiter materia et
      forma: nam forma dat esse, materia autem recipit. Est igitur
      efficiens causa finis, finis autem causa efficientis. Efficiens est
      causa finis quantum ad esse, quidem, quia movendo perducit efficiens
      ad hoc, quod _sit_ finis. Finis autem est causa efficientis non
      quantum ad esse sed quantum ad _rationem causalitatis_. Nam
      efficiens est causa in quantum agit; non autem agit nisi causa
      [gratia] finis. Unde ex fine habet suam causalitatem efficiens.”—ST.
      THOMAS, _In Metaph._, v.,  .

      “Sciendum quod licet finis sit ultimus in esse in quibusdam, in
      causalitate tamen est prior semper, unde dicitur _causa causarum_,
      quia est causa causalitatis in omnibus causis. Est enim causa
      causalitatis efficientis, ut jam dictum est. Efficiens autem est
      causa causalitatis et materiae et formae.”—_ibid._, lect.  .

    Φύσις ἐστιν ἀρχὴ τὶς καὶ αἰτία του κινεῖσθαι καὶ ἠρεμεῖν ἐν ῷ ὑπάχει
      πρώτως καθ᾽ αὑτο, καὶ μὴ κατὰ συμβεβηκός. Natura est principium
      quoddam et causa cur id moveatur et quiescat, in quo inest primum,
      per se et non secundum accidens.—_Physic._, L. ii., cap.  .

    “Ars nihil aliud est quam recta ratio aliquorum operum
      faciendorum.”—_Summa Theol._ ia iiae, q. lvii., art.  .—_Cf._ _In
      Post. Anal._, l.  .

    “Natura nihil aliud est quam ratio cujusdam artis, scilicet divinae,
      indita rebus qua ipsae res moventur ad finem determinatum; sicut si
      artifex factor navis posset lignis tribuere quod ex seipsis
      moverentur ad navis formam inducendam.”—_In II Phys._, lect.  .

      “Omnia naturalia, in ea quae eis conveniunt, sunt inclinata,
      habentia in seipsis aliquod inclinationis principium, ratione cujus
      eorum inclinatio naturalis est, _ita ut quodammodo ipsa vadant, et
      non solum ducantur in fines debitos_.”—_De Veritate_, q. xxii., art.
       .

    “In nullo enim alio natura ab arte videtur differre, nisi quia
      natura est principium intrinsecum, et ars est principium
      extrinsicum. Si enim ars factiva navis esset intrinseca ligno, facta
      fuisset navis a natura, sicut modo fit ab arte.”—_In II. Phys._,
      lect.  .

_    Cf._ _Science of Logic_, ii., §  .

_    Cf._ _Science of Logic_, ii, §  .

_    Cf._ _Science of Logic_, ii., §§  - .

    ARISTOTLE, _Metaph._, iv., ch. v.

_    Physic._, ii., ch. v.

_    ibid._

_    Cf._ _Science of Logic_, ii., §§  ,  - .

    Οὐδὲν γὰρ ὤς ἔτυχε ποιεῖ ἡ φυσις.—_De Coelo_, ii.,  .

    Fatalism is the view that all things happen by a blind, inevitable,
      eternally foredoomed and unintelligible necessity. Thus SENECA
      (_Nat. Quaest._, L. III., cap.  ) describes _fatum_ as _necessitas
      omnium rerum actionumque, quam nulla vis rumpat_. This _necessitas
      ineluctabilis_ is totally different from the conditional physical
      necessity of the course of Nature dependently on the _Fiat_ of a
      Supreme Free Will guided by Supreme Intelligence (_Cf._ _Science of
      Logic_, §§  ,  ,  ,  ). If the necessity of actual
      occurrences is not ultimately traceable to the _Fiat_ of an
      Intelligent Will—and mechanists deny that it can be so traced—it is
      rightly described as fatalistic, blind, purposeless, unintelligible.

_    Cf._ MERCIER, _op. cit._, §§  ,  .

    “Expliquer par une rencontre fortuite, la convergence d’éléments,
      dont chacun a sa poussée propre, c’est rendre raison de la
      _convergence_ par des principes de _divergence_.... Il est donc
      contradictoire d’attribuer au hasard la raison explicative de
      l’ordre.”—MERCIER, _op. cit._, §  .

_    Cf._ _Science of Logic_, ii., §§  ,  , and _passim_.

    “Similiter ex prioribus pervenitur ad posteriora in arte et in
      natura: unde si artificialia, ut domus, fierent a natura, hoc ordine
      fierent, quo nunc fiunt per artem: scilicet prius institueretur
      fundamentum, et postea erigerentur parietes, et ultimo supponeretur
      tectum.... Et similiter si ea quae fiunt a natura fierent ab arte,
      hoc modo fierent sicut apta nata sunt fieri a natura; ut patet in
      sanitate, quam contigit fieri, et ab arte et a natura.... Unde
      manifestum est quod in natura est alterum propter alterum, scilicet
      priora propter posteriora, sicut et in arte.”—ST. THOMAS, _In II.
      Phys._, lect.  .—_Cf._ _supra_, p.  , n.  .

    “Ordo est parium dispariumque rerum sua cuique loca tribuens
      dispositio.”—_De Civ. Dei_, xix.,  .

_    Cf._ MERCIER, _op. cit._, §§  - .

    “_La convergence de causes indifférentes qui réalisent d’une manière
      harmonieuse et persistante un même objet ordonné, ne s’explique
      point par des coincidences fortuites; elle réclame un principe
      interne de convergence._”—_Ibid._, §  .

    TENNYSON, _In Memoriam_, lvi.

    BROWNING, _A Soul’s Tragedy_, Act.  .

    “Universum habet bonum ordinis et bonum separatum.”—_In Metaph._,
      xii., l.  .

    ARISTOTLE, _Metaph._, xi.,  . Does Aristotle teach that God moves
      the universe only as its Final Cause, as the Supreme Good towards
      which it tends, or also as Efficient Cause? His thought is here
      obscure, and has given rise to much controversy among his
      interpreters.

    Ἡ ἀρχὴ καὶ τὸ πρῶτον τῶν ὄντων ἀκίνητον καὶ καθ᾽ ἁυτὸ καὶ κατὰ
      συμβεβηκός, κινοῦν δὲ τὴν πρώτην ἀΐδιον καὶ μίαν κίνησιν.—_Ibid._,
      xi.,  .

    Κινεῖ δὲ (οὐ ἕνεκα) ὡς ἐρώμενον, κινούμενον δὲ τᾶλλα κινει.—_ibid._,
       .

    “Totus ordo universi est propter primum moventem, ut scilicet
      explicetur in universo ordinato id quod est in intellectu et
      voluntate primi moventis. Et sic oportet quod a primo movente sit
      tota ordinatio universi.”—_Ibid._, xii., l.  .

    ... Among themselves all things
      Have order; and from hence the form, which makes
      The universe resemble God. In this
      The higher creatures see the printed steps
      Of that eternal worth, which is the end
      Whither the line is drawn. All natures lean
      In this their order, diversely, some more,
      Some less approaching to their primal source.
      Thus they to different havens are moved on
      Through the vast sea of being, and each one
      With instinct giv’n, that bears it in its course;
      This to the lunar sphere directs the fire,
      This prompts the hearts of mortal animals,
      This the brute earth together knits and binds.
      Nor only creatures, void of intellect,
      Are aim’d at by this bow; but even those
      That have intelligence and love, are pierced.
      That Providence, who so well orders all,
      With her own light makes ever calm the heaven,
      In which the substance that hath greatest speed
      Is turned: and thither now, as to our seat
      Predestin’d, we are carried by the force
      Of that strong cord, that never looses dart,
      But at fair aim and glad ...

--------------------

"Philosophy," says Hierocles, "is the purification and perfection of human
life. It is the purification, indeed, from material irrationality, and the
mortal body; but the perfection, in consequence of being the resumption of
our proper felicity, and a reascent to the divine likeness. To effect these
two is the province of Virtue and Truth; the former exterminating the
immoderation of the passions; and the latter introducing the divine form to
those who are naturally adapted to its reception."

Of philosophy thus defined, which may be compared to a luminous pyramid,
terminating in Deity, and having for its basis the rational soul of man
and its spontaneous unperverted conceptions,--of this philosophy, August,
magnificent, and divine, Plato may be justly called the primary leader
and hierophant, through whom, like the mystic light in the inmost
recesses of some sacred temple, it first shone forth with occult and
venerable splendour.[1] It may indeed be truly said of the whole of this
philosophy, that it is the greatest good which man can participate: for
if it purifies us from the defilements of the passions and assimilates us
to Divinity, it confers on us the proper felicity of our nature. Hence it
is easy to collect its pre-eminence to all other philosophies; to show
that where they oppose it, they are erroneous; that so far as they
contain any thing scientific they are allied to it; and that at best they
are but rivulets derived from this vast ocean of truth.

------------------
[1] In the mysteries a light of this kind shone forth from the adytum of
the temple in which they were exhibited.
------------------

To evince that the philosophy of Plato possesses this preeminence; that
its dignity and sublimity are unrivaled; that it is the parent of all
that ennobles man; and, that it is founded on principles, which neither
time can obliterate, nor sophistry subvert, is the principal design of
this Introduction.

To effect this design, I shall in the first place present the reader with
the outlines of the principal dogmas of Plato's philosophy. The undertaking
is indeed no less novel than arduous, since the author of it has to tread
in paths which have been untrodden for upwards of a thousand years, and
to bring to light truths which for that extended period have been
concealed in Greek. Let not the reader, therefore, be surprised at the
solitariness of the paths through which I shall attempt to conduct him,
or at the novelty of the objects which will present themselves in the
journey: for perhaps he may fortunately recollect that he has traveled
the same road before, that the scenes were once familiar to him, and that
the country through which he is passing is his native land. At, least, if
his sight should be dim, and his memory oblivious, (for the objects which
he will meet with can only be seen by the most piercing eyes,) and his
absence from them has been lamentably long, let him implore the power
of wisdom,

  From mortal mists to purify his eyes,
  That God and man he may distinctly see.

Let us also, imploring the assistance of the same illuminating power, begin
the solitary journey.

Of all the dogmas of Plato, that concerning the first principle of things
as far transcends in sublimity the doctrine of other philosophers of a
different sect, on this subject, as this supreme cause of all transcends
other causes. For, according to Plato, the highest God, whom in the
Republic he calls the good, and in the Parmenides the one, is not only
above soul and intellect, but is even superior to being itself. Hence,
since every thing which can in any respect be known, or of which any
thing can be asserted, must be connected with the universality of things,
but the first cause is above all things, it is very properly said by
Plato to be perfectly ineffable. The first hypothesis therefore of his,
Parmenides, in which all things are denied of this immense principle,
concludes as follows: "The one therefore is in no respect. So it seems.
Hence it is not in such a manner as to be one, for thus it would be
being, and participate of essence; but as it appears, the one neither is
one, nor is, if it be proper to believe in reasoning of this kind. It
appears so. But can any thing either belong to, or be affirmed of that,
which is not? How can it? Neither therefore does any name belong to it,
nor discourse, nor any science, nor sense, nor opinion. It does not
appear that there can. Hence it can neither be named, nor spoken of, nor
conceived by opinion, nor be known, nor perceived by any being. So it
seems." And here it must be observed that this conclusion respecting the
highest principle of things, that he is perfectly ineffable and
inconceivable, is the result of a most scientific series of negations, in
which not only all sensible and intellectual beings are denied of him,
but even natures the most transcendently allied to him, his first and
most divine progeny. For that which so eminently distinguishes the
philosophy of Plato from others is this, that every part of it is stamped
with the character of science. The vulgar indeed proclaim the Deity to be
ineffable; but as they have no scientific knowledge that he is so, this
is nothing more than a confused and indistinct perception of the most
sublime of all truths, like that of a thing seen between sleeping and
waking, like Phaeacia to Ulysses when sailing to his native land,

  That lay before him indistinct and vast,
  Like a broad shield amid the watr'y waste.

In short, an unscientific perception of the ineffable nature of the
Divinity resembles that of a man, who on surveying the heavens, should
assert of the altitude of its highest part, that it surpasses that of
the loftiest tree, and is therefore immeasurable. But to see this
scientifically, is like a survey of this highest part of the heavens by
the astronomer; for he by knowing the height of the media between us and
it, knows also scientifically that it transcends in altitude not only the
loftiest tree; but the summits of air and aether, the moon, and even the
sun itself.

Let us therefore investigate what is the ascent to the ineffably, and
after what manner it is accomplished, according to Plato, from the last
of things, following the profound and most inquisitive Damascius as our
leader in this arduous investigation. Let our discourse also be common
to other principles, and to things proceeding from them to that which is
last, and let us, beginning from that which is perfectly effable and
known to sense, ascend too the ineffable, and establish in silence, as in
a port, the parturitions of truth concerning it. Let us then assume the
following axiom, in which as in a secure vehicle we may safely pass from
hence thither. I say, therefore, that the unindigent is naturally prior
to the indigent. For that which is in want of another is naturally
adapted from necessity to be subservient to that of which it is indigent.
But if they are mutually in want of each other, each being indigent of
the other in a different respect, neither of them will be the principle.
For the unindigent is most adapted to that which is truly the principle.
And if it is in want of any thing, according to this it will not be the
principle. It is however necessary that the principles should be this
very thing, the principle alone. The unindigent therefore pertains to
this, nor must it by any means be acknowledged that there is any thing
prior to it. This however, would be acknowledged if it had any connection
with the indigent.

Let us then consider body, (that is, a triply extended substance,) endued
with quality; for this is the first thing effable by us, and is, sensible.
Is this then the principle of things? But it is two things, body, and
quality which is in body as a subject. Which of these therefore is by
nature prior? For both are indigent of their proper parts; and that also
which is in a subject is indigent of the subject. Shall we say then that
body itself is the principle of the first essence? But this is impossible.
For, in the first place, the principle will not receive any thing from that
which is posterior to itself. But body, we say is the recipient of quality.
Hence quality, and a subsistence in conjunction with it, are not derived
from body, since quality is present with body as something different. And,
in the second place, body is every way, divisible; its several parts are
indigent of each other, and the whole is indigent of all the parts. As it
is indigent, therefore, and receives its completion from things which are
indigent, it will not be entirely unindigent.

Further still, if it is not one but united, it will require, as Plato
says, the connecting one. It is likewise something common and formless,
being as it were a certain matter. It requires, therefore, ornament and
the possession of form, that it may not be merely body, but a body with a
certain particular quality; as for instance, a fiery, or earthly, body,
and, in short, body adorned and invested with a particular quality. Hence
the things which accede to it, finish and adorn it. Is then that which
accedes the principle? But this is impossible. For it does not abide in
itself, nor does it subsist alone, but is in a subject of which also it
is indigent. If, however, some one should assert that body is not a
subject, but one of the elements in each, as for instance, animal in
horses and man, thus also each will be indigent of the other, viz. this
subject, and that which is in the subject; or rather the common element,
animal, and the peculiarities, as the rational and irrational, will be
indigent. For elements are always, indigent of each other, and that which
is composed from elements is indigent of the elements. In short, this
sensible nature, and which is so manifest to us, is neither body, for
this does not of itself move the senses, nor quality; for this does not
possess an interval commensurate with sense. Hence, that which is the
object of sight, is neither body nor color; but colored body, or color
corporalized, is that which is motive of the sight. And universally, that
which its sensible, which is body with a particular quality, is motive of
sense. From hence it is evident that the thing which excites the sense is
something incorporeal. For if it was body, it would not yet be the object
of sense. Body therefore requires that which is incorporeal, and that
which is incorporeal, body. For an incorporeal nature, is not of itself
sensible. It is, however, different from body, because these two possess
prerogatives different from each other, and neither of these subsists
prior to the other; but being elements of one sensible thing, they are
present with each other; the one imparting interval to that which is void
of interval, but the other introducing to that which is formless,
sensible variety invested with form. In the third place, neither are both
these together the principles; since they are not unindigent. For they
stand in need of their proper elements, and of that which conducts them
to the generation of one form. For body cannot effect this, since it is
of itself impotent; nor quality, since it is not able to subsist separate
from the body in which it is, or together with which it has its being.
The composite therefore either produces itself, which is impossible, for
it does not converge to itself, but the whole of it is multifariously
dispersed, or it is not produced by itself, and there is some other
principle prior to it.

Let it then be supposed to be that which is called nature, being a
principle of motion and rest, in that which is moved and at rest,
essentially and not according to accident. For this is something more
simple, and is fabricative of composite forms. If, however, it is in the
things fabricated, and does not subsist separate from nor prior to them,
but stands in need of them for its being, it will not be unindigent;
though its possesses something transcendent with respect to them, viz.
the power of fashioning and fabricating them. For it has its being
together with them, and has in them an inseparable subsistence; so
that, when they are it is, and is not when they are not, and this in
consequence of perfectly verging to them, and not being able to sustain
that which is appropriate. For the power of increasing, nourishing, and
generating similars, and the one prior to these three, viz. nature, is
not wholly incorporeal, but is nearly a certain quality of body, from
which it alone differs, in that it imparts to the composite to be
inwardly moved and at rest. For the quality of that which is sensible
imparts that which is apparent in matter, and that which falls on sense.
But body imparts interval every way extended; and nature, an inwardly
proceeding natural energy, whether according to place only, or according
to nourishing, increasing, and generating things similar. Nature,
however, is inseparable from a subject, and is indigent, so that it will
not be in short the principle, since it is indigent of that which is
subordinate. For it will not be wonderful, if being a certain principle,
it is indigent of the principle above it; but it would be wonderful if it
were indigent of things posterior to itself, and of which it is supposed
to be the principle.

By the like arguments we may show that the principle cannot be irrational
soul, whether sensitive, or orectic. For if it appears that it has
something separate, together with impulsive and Gnostic enemies, yet at
the same time it is bound in body, and has something inseparable from it;
since it is notable to convert itself to itself, but its enemy is mingled
with its subject. For it is evident that its essence is something of this
kind; since if it were liberated and in itself free, it would also evince
a certain independent enemy, and would not always be converted to body;
but sometimes it would be converted to itself; or though it were always
converted to body, yet it would judge and explore itself. The energies,
therefore, of the multitude of mankind, (though they are conversant with
externals,) yet, at the same time they exhibit that which is separate
about them. For they consult how they should engage in them, and observe
that deliberation is necessary, in order to effect or be passive to
apparent good, or to decline something of the contrary. But the impulses
of other animals are uniform and spontaneous, are moved together with the
sensible organs, and require the senses alone that they may obtain from
sensibles the pleasurable, and avoid the painful. If, therefore, the body
communicates in pleasure and pain, and is affected in a certain respect
by them, it is evident that the psychical energies, (i.e. energies
belonging to the soul) are exerted, mingled with bodies, and are not
purely psychical, but are also corporeal; for perception is of the
animated body, or of the soul corporalized, though in such perception the
psychical idiom predominates over the corporeal; just as in bodies, the
corporeal idiom has dominion according to interval and subsistence. As
the irrational soul, therefore, has its being in something different from
itself, so far it is indigent of the subordinate: but a thing of this
kind will not be the principle.

Prior them to this essence, we see a certain form separate from a
subject, and converted to itself, such as is the rational nature. Our
soul, therefore, presides over its proper energies and corrects itself.
This, however, would not be the case, unless it was converted to itself;
and it would not be converted, to itself unless it had a separate
essence. It is not therefore indigent of the subordinate. Shall we then
say that it is the most perfect principle? But, it does not at once exert
all its energies, but is always indigent of the greater part. The
principle, however, wishes to have nothing indigent: but the rational
nature is an essence in want of its own energies. Some one, however, may
say that it is an eternal essence, and has never-failing essential
energies, always concurring with its essence, according to the self-moved
and ever vital, and that it is therefore unindigent; but the principle is
perfectly unindigent. Soul therefore, and which exerts mutable energies,
will not be the most proper principle. Hence it is necessary that there
should be something prior to this, which is in every respect immutable,
according to nature, life, and knowledge, and according to all powers and
enemies, such as we assert an eternal and immutable essence to be, and
such as is much honoured intellect, to which Aristotle having ascended,
thought he had discovered the first principle. For what can be wanting to
that which perfectly comprehends in itself its own plenitudes (oleromata),
and of which neither addition nor ablation changes any thing belonging to
it? Or is not this also, one and many, whole and parts, containing in
itself, things first, middle, and last? The subordinate plenitudes also
stand in need of the more excellent, and the more excellent of the
subordinate, and the whole of the parts. For the things related are
indigent of each other, and what are first of what are last, through the
same cause; for it is not of itself that which is first. Besides, the one
here is indigent of the many, because it has its subsistence in the many.
Or it may be said, that this one is collective of the many, and this not
by itself, but in conjunction with them. Hence there is much of the
indigent in this principle. For since intellect generates in itself its
proper plenitudes from which the whole at once receives its completion,
it will be itself indigent of itself, not only that which is generated of
that which generates, but also that which generates, of that which is
generated, in order to the whole completion of that which wholly generates
itself. Further still, intellect understands and is understood, is
intellective of and intelligible to itself, and both these. Hence the
intellectual is indigent of the intelligible, as of its proper object of
desire; and the intelligible is in want of the intellectual, because it
wishes to be the intelligible of it. Both also are indigent of either,
since the possession is always accompanied with indigence, in the same
manner as the world is always present with matter. Hence a certain
indigence is naturally coessentiallized with intellect, so that it cannot
be the most proper principle. Shall we, therefore, in the next place,
direct our attention to the most simple of beings, which Plato calls the
one being, [Greek: en on]? For as there is no separation there throughout
the Whole, nor any multitude, or order, or duplicity, or conversion to
itself, what indigence will there appear to me, in the perfectly united?
And especially what indigence will there be of that which is subordinate?
Hence the great Parmenides ascended to this most safe principle, as that
which is most unindigent. Is it not, however, here necessary to attend to
the conception of Plato, that the united is not the one itself, but that
which is passive[2] to it? And this being the case, it is evident that it
ranks after the one; for it is supposed to be the united and not the one
itself. If also being is composed from the elements bound and infinity,
as appears from the Philebus of Plato, where he calls it that which is
mixt, it will be indigent of its elements. Besides, if the conception of
being is different from that of being united, and that which is a whole
is both united and being, these will be indigent of each other, and the
whole which is called one being is indigent of the two. And though the
one in this is better than being, yet this is indigent of being, in order
to the subsistence of one being. But if being here supervenes the one, as
it were, form in that which is mixt and united, just as the idiom of man
in that which is collectively rational-mortal-animal, thus also the one
will be indigent of being. If, however, to speak more properly, the one
is two-fold; this being the cause of the mixture, and subsisting prior to
being, but that conferring rectitude, on being,--if this be the case,
neither will the indigent perfectly desert this nature. After all these,
it may be said that the one will be perfectly unindigent. For neither is
it indigent of that which is posterior to itself for its subsistence,
since the truly one is by itself separated from all things; nor is it
indigent of that which is inferior or more excellent in itself; for there
is nothing in it besides itself; nor is it in want of itself. But it is
one, because neither has it any duplicity with respect to itself. For not
even the relation of itself to itself must be asserted of the truly one;
since it is perfectly simple. This, therefore, is the most unindigent of
all things. Hence this is the principle and the cause of all; and this is
at once the first of all things. If these qualities, however, are present
with it, it will not be the one. Or may we not say that all things
subsist in the one according to the one? And that both these subsist in
it, and such other things as we predicate of it, as, for instance, the
most simple, the most excellent, the most powerful, the preserver of all
things, and the good itself? If these things, however, are thus true of
the one, it will thus also be indigent of things posterior to itself,
according to those very things which we add to it. For the principle is,
and is said to be the principle of things proceeding from it, and the
cause is the cause of things caused, and the first is the first of things
arranged, posterior to it.[3]

------------------
[2] See the Sophista of Plato, where this is asserted.

[3] For a thing cannot be said to be a principle or cause without the
subsistence of the things of which it is the principle or cause. Hence,
so far as it is a principle or cause, it will be indigent of the
subsistence of these.
------------------

Further still, the simple subsists according to a transcendency of other
things, the most powerful according to power with relation to the subjects
of it; and the good, the desirable, and the preserving, are so called with
reference to things benefitted, preserved, and desiring. And if it should
be said to be all things according to the preassumption of all things in
itself, it will indeed be said to be so according to the one alone, and
will at the same time be the one cause of all things prior to all, and will
be thus, and no other according to the one. So far, therefore, as it is the
one alone, it will be unindigent; but so far as unindigent, it will be the
first principle, and stable root of all principles. So far, however, as it
is the principle and the first cause of all things, and is pre-established
as the object of desire to all things, so far it appears to be in a certain
respect indigent of the things to which it is related. It has therefore, if
it be lawful so to speak, an ultimate vestige of indigence, just as on the
contrary matter has an ultimate echo of the unindigent, or a most obscure
and debile impression of the one. And language indeed appears to be here
subverted. For so far as it is the one, it is also unindigent, since the
principle has appeared to subsist according to the most unindigent and the
one. At the same time, however, so far as it is the one, it is also the
principle; and so far as it is the one it is unindigent, but so far as the
principle, indigent. Hence so far as it is unindigent, it is also indigent,
though not according to the same; but with respect to being that which it
is, it is undigent; but as producing and comprehending other things in
itself, it is indigent. This, however, is the peculiarity of the one; so
that it is both unindigent and indigent according to the one. Not indeed
than it is each of these, in such a manner as we divide it in speaking of
it, but it is one alone; and according to this is both other things, and
that which is indigent. For how is it possible, it should not be indigent
also so far as it is the one? Just as it is all other things which proceed
from it. For the indigent also is, something belonging to all things.
Something else, therefore, must be investigated which in no respect has any
kind of indigence. But of a thing of this kind it cannot with truth be
asserted that it is the principle, nor can it even be said of it that it is
most unindigent, though this appears to be the most venerable of all
assertions.[4]

---------------
[4] See the extracts from Damascius in the additional notes to the third
volume, which contain an inestimable treasury of the most profound
conceptions concerning the ineffable.
------------------

For this signifies transcendency, and an exemption from the indigent. We do
not, however, think it proper to call this even the perfectly exempt; but
that which is in every respect incapable of being apprehended, and about
which we must be perfectly silent, will be the most, just axiom of our
conception in the present investigation; nor yet this as uttering any
thing, but as rejoicing in not uttering, and by this venerating that
immense unknown. This then is the mode of ascent to that which is called
the first, or rather to that which is beyond every thing which can be
conceived, or become the subject of hypothesis.

There is also another mode, which does not place the unindigent before
the indigent, but considers that which is indigent of a more excellent
nature, as subsisting secondary to that which is more excellent. Every
where then, that which is in capacity is secondary to that which is in
energy. For that it may proceed into energy, and that it may not remain
in capacity in vain, it requires that which is in energy. For the more
excellent never blossoms from the subordinate nature. Let this then be
defined by us according to common unperverted conceptions. Matter
therefore has prior to itself material form; because all matter is form
in capacity, whether it be the first matter which is perfectly formless,
or the second which subsists according to body void of quality, or in
other words mere triple extension, to which it is likely those directed
their attention who first investigated sensibles, and which at first
appeared to be the only thing that had a subsistence. For the existence
of that which is common in the different elements, persuaded them that
there is a certain body void of quality. But since, among bodies of this
kind, some possess the governing principle inwardly, and others
externally, such as things artificial, it is necessary besides quality to
direct our attention to nature, as being something better than qualities,
and which is prearranged in the order of cause, as art is, of things
artificial. Of things, however, which are inwardly governed, some appear
to possess being alone, but others to be nourished and increased, and to
generate things similar to themselves. There is therefore another certain
cause prior to the above-mentioned nature, viz. a vegetable power itself.
But it is evident that all such things as are ingenerated in body as in a
subject, are of themselves incorporeal, though they become corporeal by
the participation of that in which they subsist, so that they are said
to be and are material in consequence of what they suffer from matter.
Qualities therefore, and still more natures, and in a still greater
degree the vegetable life, preserve the incorporeal in themselves. Since
however, sense exhibits another more conspicuous life, pertaining to
beings which are moved according to impulse and place, this must be
established prior to that, as being a more proper principle, and as the
supplier of a certain better form, that of a self-moved animal, and which
naturally precedes plants rooted in the earth. The animal however, is not
accurately self-moved. For the whole is not such throughout they whole;
but a part moves and a part is moved. This therefore is the apparent
self-moved. Hence, prior to this it is necessary there should be that
which is truly self-moved, and which according to the whole of itself
moves ands is moved, that the apparently self-moved may be the image of
this. And indeed the soul which moves the body must be considered as a
more proper self-moved essence. This, however, is twofold, the one
rational, the other irrational. For that there is a rational soul is
evident: or has not every one a cosensation of himself, more clear or
more obscure, when converted to himself in the attentions to and
investigations of himself, and in the vital and Gnostic animadversions of
himself? For the essence which is capable of this, and which can collect
universals by reasoning, will very justly be rational. The irrational
soul also, though it does not appear to investigate these things, and to
reason with itself, yet at the same time it moves bodies from place to
place, being itself previously moved from itself; for at different times
it exerts a different impulse. Does it therefore move itself from one
impulse to another? or it is moved by something else, as, for instance,
by the whole rational soul in the universe? But it would be absurd to say
that the energies of every irrational soul are not the energies of that
soul, but of one more divine; since they are infinite, and mingled with
much of the base and imperfect. For this would be just the same as to say
that the irrational enemies are the energies of the rational soul. I omit
to mention the absurdity of supposing that the whole essence is not
generative of its proper energies. For if the irrational soul is a
certain essence, it will have peculiar energies of its own, not imparted
from something else, but proceeding from itself. This irrational soul,
therefore, will also move itself at different times to different impulses.
But if it moves itself, it will be converted to itself. If, however, this
be the case, it will have a separate subsistence, and will not be in a
subject. It is therefore rational, if it looks to itself: for in being
converted to, it surveys itself. For when extended to things external, it
looks to externals, or rather it looks to colored body, but does not see
itself, because sight itself is neither body nor that which is colored.
Hence it does not revert to itself. Neither therefore is this the case
with any other irrational nature. For neither does the phantasy project a
type of itself, but of that which is sensible, as for instance of colored
body. Nor does irrational appetite desire itself, but aspires after a
certain object of desire, such as honor, or pleasure, or riches. It does
not therefore move itself.

But if some one, on seeing that brutes exert rational energies, should
apprehend that these also participate of the first self-moved, and on
this account possess a soul converted to itself, it may perhaps be
granted to him that these also are rational natures, except that they
are not so essentially, but according to participation, and this most
obscure, just as the rational soul may be said to be intellectual
according to participation, as always projecting common conceptions
without distortion. It must however be observed, that the extreme are
that which is capable of being perfectly separated, such as the rational
form, and that which is perfectly inseparable, such as corporeal quality,
and that in the middle of these nature subsists, which verges to the
inseparable, having a small representation of the separable and the
irrational soul, which verges to the separable; or it appears in a
certain respect to subsist by itself, separate from a subject; so that
it becomes doubtful whether it is self-motive, or alter-motive. For it
contains an abundant vestige of self-motion, but not that which is true
and converted to itself, and on this account perfectly separated from
a subject. And the vegetable soul has in a certain respect a middle
subsistence. On this account to some of the ancients it appeared to be
a certain soul, but to others, nature.

Again, therefore, that we may return to the proposed object of
investigation, how can a self-motive nature of this kind, which is
mingled with the alter-motive, be the first principle of things? For
it neither subsists from itself, nor does it in reality perfect itself;
but it requires a certain other nature, both for its subsistence and
perfection: and prior to it is that which is truly self-moved. Is
therefore that which is properly self-moved the principle, and is it
indigent of no form more excellent than itself? Or is not that which
moves always naturally prior to that which is moved; and in short does
not every form which is pure from its contrary subsist by itself prior
to that which is mingled with it? And is not the pure the cause of the
commingled? For that which is coessentialized with another has also an
energy mingled with that other. So that a self-moved nature will indeed,
make itself; but thus subsisting it will be at the same time moving and
moved, but will not be made a moving nature only. For neither is it this
alone. Every form however is always alone according to its first
subsistence; so that there will be that which moves only without being
moved. And indeed it would be absurd that there should be that which is
moved only such as body, but that prior both to that which is self-moved
and that which is moved only, there should not be that which moves only.
For it is evident that there must be, since this will be a more excellent
nature, and that which is self-moved, so far as it moves itself, is more
excellent than so far as it is moved. It is necessary therefore that the
essence which moves unmoved, should be first, as that which is moved, not
being motive, is the third, in the middle of which is the self-moved,
which we say requires that which moves in order to its becoming motive.
In short, if it is moved, it will not abide, so far as it is moved; and
if it moves, it is necessary it should remain moving so far as it moves.
Whence then does it derive the power of abiding? For from itself it
derives the power either of being moved only, or of at the same time
abiding and being moved wholly according to the same. Whence then does
it simply obtain the power of abiding? Certainly from that which simply
abides. But, this is an immovable cause. We must therefore admit that
the immovable is prior to the self moved. Let us consider then if the
immovable is the most proper principle? But how is this possible? For the
immovable contains as numerous a multitude immovably; as the self-moved
self-moveably. Besides an immovable separation must necessarily subsist
prior to a self-moveable separation. The unmoved therefore is at the same
time one and many, and is at the same time united and separated, and a
nature of this kind is denominated intellect. But it is evident that
the united in this is naturally prior to and more honorable than the
separated. For separation is always indigent of union; but not, on the
contrary, union of separation. Intellect, however, has not the united
pure from its opposite. For intellectual form is coessentialized with the
separated, through the whole of itself. Hence that which is in a certain
respect united requires that which is simply united; and that which
subsists with another is indigent of that which subsists by itself; and
that which subsists according to participation, of that which subsists
according to essence. For intellect being self-subsistent produces itself
as united, and at the same time separated. Hence it subsists according to
both these. It is produced therefore from that which is simply united and
alone united. Prior therefore to that which is formal is the
uncircumscribed, and undistributed into forms. And this is that which we
call the united, and which the wise men of antiquity denominated being,
possessing in one contraction multitude, subsisting prior to the many.

Having therefore arrived thus far, let us here rest for a while, and
consider with ourselves, whether being is the investigated principle of
all things. For what will there be which does not participate of being?
May we not say, that this, if it is the united, will be secondary to the
one, and that by participating of the one it becomes the united? But in
short; if we conceive the one to be something different from being, if
being is prior to the one, it will not participate of the one. It will
therefore be many only, and these will be infinitely infinite. But if the
one is with being, and being with the one, and they are either coordinate
or divided from each other, there will be two principles, and the
above-mentioned absurdity will happen. Or they will mutually participate
of each other, and there will be two elements. Or they are parts of
something else, consisting from both. And, if this be the case, what will
that be which leads them to union with each other? For if the one unites
being to itself (for this may be said), the one also will energize prior
to being, that it may call forth and convert being to itself. The one,
therefore, will subsist from itself self-perfect prior to being. Further
still, the more simple is always prior to the more composite. If
therefore they are similarly simple, there will either be two principles,
or one from the two, and this will be a composite. Hence the simple and
perfectly incomposite is prior to this, which must be either one, or not
one; and if not one, it must either be many, or nothing. But with respect
to nothing, if it signifies that which is perfectly void, it will signify
something vain. But if it signifies the arcane, this will not even be
that which is simple. In short, we cannot conceive any principle more
simple than the one. The one therefore is in every respect prior to
being. Hence this is the principle of all things, and Plato recurring to
this, did not require any other principle in his reasonings. For the
arcane in which this our ascent terminates is not the principle of
reasoning, nor of knowledge, nor of animals, nor of beings, nor of
unities, but simply of all things, being arranged above every conception
and suspicion that we can frame. Hence Plato indicates nothing concerning
it, but makes his negations of all other things except the one, from the
one. For that the one is he denies in the last place, but he does not
make a negation of the one. He also, besides this, even denies this
negation, but not the one. He denies, too, name and conception, and all
knowledge, and what can be said more, whole itself and every being. But
let there be the united and the unical, and, if you will, the two
principles bound and the infinite. Plato, however, never in any respect
makes a negation of the one which is beyond all these. Hence in the
Sophista he considers it as the one prior to being, and in the Republic
as the good beyond every essence; but at the same time the one alone is
left. Whether however is it known and effable, or unknown and ineffable?
Or is it in a certain respect these, and in a certain respect not? For by
a negation of this it may be said the ineffable is affirmed. And again,
by the simplicity of knowledge it will be known or suspected, but by
composition perfectly unknown. Hence neither will it be apprehended by
negation. And in short, so far as it is admitted to be one, so far it
will be coarranged with other things, which are the subject of position.
For it is the summit of things, which subsist according to position. At
the same time there is much in it of the ineffable and unknown, the
uncoordinated, and that which is deprived of position, but these are
accompanied with a representation of the Contraries: and the former are
more excellent, than the latter. But every where things pure subsist
prior to their contraries, and such as are unmingled to the commingled.
For either things more excellent subsist in the one essentially, and in a
certain respect the contraries of these also will be there at the same
time; or they subsist according to participation, and are derived from
that which is first a thing of this kind. Prior to the one, therefore, is
that which is simply and perfectly ineffable, without position,
uncoordinated, and incapable of being apprehended, to which also the
ascent of the present discourse hastens through the clearest indications,
omitting none of those natures between the first and the last of things.

Such then is the ascent to the highest God, according to the theology of
Plato, venerably preserving his ineffable exemption from all things, and
his transcendency, which cannot be circumscribed by any gnostic energy,
and at the same time, unfolding the paths which lead upwards to him, and
enkindling that luminous summit of the soul, by which she is conjoined
with the incomprehensible one.

From this truly ineffable principle, exempt from all essence, power, and
energy, a multitude of divine natures, according to Plato, immediately
proceeds. That this must necessarily be the case, will be admitted by the
reader who understands what has been already discussed, and is fully
demonstrated by Plato in the Parmenides, as will be evident to the
intelligent from the notes on that Dialogue. In addition therefore to
what I have staid on this subject, I shall further observe at present
that this doctrine, which is founded in the sublimest and most scientific
conceptions of the human mind, may be clearly shown to be a legitimate
dogma of Plato from what is asserted by him in the sixth book of his
Republic. For he there affirms, in the most clear and unequivocal terms,
that the good, or the ineffable principle of things is superessential,
and shows by the analogy of the sun to the good, that what light and
sight are in the visible, that truth and intelligence are in the
intelligible world. As light therefore, immediately proceeds from the
sun, and wholly subsists according to a solar idiom or property, so truth
or the immediate progeny of the good, must subsist according to a
superessential idiom. And as the good, according to Plato, is the same
with the one, as is evident from the Parmenides, the immediate progeny of
the one will be the same as that of the good. But, the immediate
offspring of the one cannot be any thing else than unities. And, hence we
necessarily infer that according to Plato, the immediate offspring of the
ineffable principle of things are superessential unities. They differ
however from their immense principle in this, that he is superessential
and ineffable, without any addition; but this divine multitude is
participated by the several orders of being, which are suspended from and
produced by it. Hence, in consequence of being connected with multitude
through this participation, they are necessarily subordinate to the one.

No less admirably, therefore, than Platonically does Simplicius, in his
Commentary of Epictetus, observe on this subject as follows: "The
fountain and principle of all things is the good: for that which all
things desire, and to which all things are extended, is the principle and
the end of all things. The good also produces from itself all things,
first, middle, and last. But it produces such as are first and proximate
to itself, similar to itself; one goodness, many goodnesses, one
simplicity and unity which transcends all others, many, unities, and one
principle many principles. For the one, the principle, the good, and
deity, are the same: for deity is the first and the cause of all things.
But it is necessary that the first should also be most simple; since
whatever is a composite and has multitude is posterior to the one. And
multitude and things, which are not good desire the good as being above
them: and in short, that which is not itself the principle is from the
principle.

But it is also necessary that the principle of all things should possess
the highest, and all, power. For the amplitude of power consists in
producing all things from itself, and in giving subsistence to similars,
prior to things which are dissimilar. Hence the one principle produces
many principles, many simplicities, and many goodnesses, proximately from
itself. For since all things differ from each other, and are multiplied
with their proper differences, each of these multitudes is suspended from
its one proper principle. Thus, for instance, all beautiful things,
whatever and wherever they may be, whether in souls or in bodies, are
suspended from one fountain of beauty. Thus too, whatever possesses
symmetry, and whatever is true, and all principles, are in a certain
respect, connate with the first principle, so far as they are principles
and fountains and goodnesses, with an appropriate subjection and analogy.
For what the one principle is to all beings, that each of the other
principles is to the multitude comprehended under the idiom of its
principle. For it is impossible, since each multitude is characterized
by a certain difference, that it should not be extended to its proper
principle, which illuminates one and the same form to all the individuals
of that multitude. For the one is the leader of every multitude; and
every peculiarity or idiom in the many is derived to the many from the
one. All partial principles therefore are established in that principle
which ranks as a whole, and are comprehended in it, not with interval and
multitude, but as parts in the whole, as multitude in the one, and number
in the monad. For this first principle is all things prior to all: and
many principles are multiplied about the one principle, and in the one
goodness, many goodnesses are established. This too, is not a certain
principle like each of the rest: for of these, one is the principle of
beauty, another of symmetry, another of truth, and another of something
else, but it is simply principle. Nor is it simply the principles of
beings, but it is the principle of principles. For it is necessary that
the idiom of principle, after the same manner as other things, should not
begin from multitude, but should be collected into one monad as a summit,
and which is the principle of principles.

Such things therefore as are first produced by the first good, in
consequence of being connascent with it, do not recede from essential
goodness, since they are immovable and unchanged, and are eternally
established in the same blessedness. They are likewise not indigent of
the good, because they are goodnesses themselves. All other natures
however, being produced by the one good, and many goodnesses, since they
fall off from essential goodness, and are not immovably established in
the hyparxis of divine goodness, on this account they possess the good
according to participation."

From this sublime theory the meaning of that ancient Egyptian dogma, that
God is all things, is at once apparent. For the first principle,[6] as
Simplicius in the above passage justly observes, is all things prior
to all; i.e. he comprehends all things causally, this being the most
transcendent mode of comprehension. As all things therefore, considered
as subsisting causally in deity, are transcendently more excellent than
they are when considered as effects preceding from him, hence that mighty
and all-comprehending whole, the first principle, is said to be all
things prior to all; priority here denoting exempt transcendency. As the
monad and the centre of a circle are images from their simplicity of this
greatest of principles, so likewise do they perspicuously shadow forth
to us its causal comprehension of all things. For all number may be
considered as subsisting occultly in the monad, and the circle in the
centre; this occult being the same in each with causal subsistence.

-----------------
[6] By the first principle here, the one is to be understood for that
arcane nature which is beyond the one, since all language is subverted
about it, can only, as we have already observed, be conceived and
venerated in the most profound silence.
-----------------

That this conception of causal subsistence is not an hypothesis devised
by the latter Platonists, but a genuine dogma of Plato, is evident from
what he says in the Philebus: for in that Dialogue he expressly asserts
that in Jupiter a royal intellect, and a royal soul subsist according to
cause. Pherecydes Syrus, too, in his Hymn to Jupiter, as cited by Kercher
(in Oedip. Egyptiac.), has the following lines:
[Greek:
  O theos esti kuklos, tetragonos ede trigonos,
  Keinos de gramme, kentron, kai panta pro panton.]

i.e. Jove is a circle, triangle and square, centre and line, and all things
before all. From which testimonies the antiquity of this sublime doctrine
is sufficiently apparent.

And here it is necessary to observe that nearly all philosophers: prior
to Jamblichus (as we are informed by Damascius) asserted indeed, that
there is one superessential God, but that the other gods had an essential
subsistence, and were deified by illuminations from the one. They
likewise said that there is a multitude of super-essential unities, who
are not self-perfect subsistences, but illuminated unions with deity,
imparted to essences by the highest Gods. That this hypothesis, however,
is not conformable to the doctrine of Plato is evident from his
Parmenides, in which he shows that the one does not subsist in itself.
(See vol. iii, p. 133). For as we have observed from Proclus, in the
notes on that Dialogue, every thing which is the cause of itself and is
self-subsistent, is said to be in itself. Hence as producing power
always comprehends, according to cause that which it produces, it is
necessary that whatever produces itself should comprehend itself so far
as it is a cause, and should be comprehended by itself so far as it is
caused; and that it should be at once both cause and the thing caused,
that which comprehends, and that which is comprehended. If therefore a
subsistence in another signifies, according to Plato, the being produced
by another more excellent cause (as we have shown in the note to p. 133,
vol. iii), a subsistence in itself must signify that which is self-
begotten, and produced by itself. If the one therefore is not self-sub-
sistent as even transcending this mode of subsistence, and if it be
necessary that there should be something self-subsistent, it follows
that this must be the characteristic property of that which immediately
proceeds from the ineffable. But that there must be something self-
subsistent is evident, since unless this is admitted there will not
be a true sufficiency in any thing.

Besides, as Damascius well observes, if that which is subordinate by
nature is self-perfect, such as the human soul, much more will this be the
case with a divine soul. But if with soul, this also will be true of
intellect. And if it be true of intellect, it will also be true of life: if
of life, of being likewise; and if of being, of the unities above being.
For the self-perfect, the self-sufficient, and that which is established in
itself, will much more subsist in superior than in subordinate natures. If
therefore, these are in the latter, they will also be in the former. I mean
the subsistence of a thing by itself, and essentialized in itself; and such
are essence and life, intellect, soul, and body. For body, though it does
not subsist from, yet subsists by itself; and through this belongs to the
genus of substance, and is contra-distinguished from accident, which cannot
exist independent of a subject.

Self-subsistent superessential natures therefore are the immediate
progeny of the one, if it be lawful thus to denominate things, which
ought rather to be called ineffable unfoldings into light from the
ineffable; for progeny implies a producing cause, and the one must be
conceived as something even more excellent than this. From this divine
self-perfect and self-producing multitude, a series of self-perfect
natures, viz. of beings, lives, intellects, and souls proceeds, according
to Plato, in the last link of which luminous series he also classes the
human soul; proximately suspended from the daemoniacal order: for this
order, as he clearly asserts in the Banquet, "stands in the middle rank
between the divine and human, fills up the vacant space, and links
together all intelligent nature." And here to the reader, who has not
penetrated the depths of Plato's philosophy, it will doubtless appear
paradoxical in the extreme, that any being should be said to produce
itself, and yet at the same time proceed from a superior cause. The
solution of this difficulty is as follows:--Essential production, or that
energy through which any nature produces something else by its very
being, is the most perfect mode of production, because vestiges of it are
seen in the last of things; thus fire imparts heat, by its very essence,
and snow coldness. And in short, this is a producing of that kind, in
which the effect is that secondarily which the cause is primarily. As
this mode of production therefore, from its being the most perfect of all
others, originates from the highest natures, it will consequently first
belong to those self-subsistent powers, who immediately proceed from the
ineffable, and will from them be derived to all the following orders of
beings. But this energy, as being characterized by the essential, will
necessarily be different in different producing causes. Hence, from that
which subsists, at the summit of self subsistent natures, a series of
self subsisting beings will indeed proceed, but then this series will be
secondarily that which its cause is primarily, and the energy by which it
produces itself will be secondary to that by which it is produced by its
cause. Thus, for instance, the rational soul both produces itself (in
consequence of being a self-motive nature), and is produced by intellect;
but it is produced by intellect immutably, and by itself transitively;
for all its energies subsist in time, and are accompanied with motion. So
far therefore as soul contains intellect by participation, so far it is
produced by intellect, but so far as it is self-motive it is produced by
itself. In short, with respect to every thing self-subsistent, the summit
of its nature is produced by a superior cause, but the evolution of that
summit is its own spontaneous energy; and, through this it becomes
self-subsistent, and self-perfect.

That the rational soul, indeed, so far as it is rational, produces
itself, may be clearly demonstrated as follows:--That which is able to
impart any thing superior and more excellent in any genus of things, can
easily impart that which is subordinate and less excellent in the same
genus; but well being confessedly ranks higher and is more excellent than
mere being. The rational soul imparts well being to itself, when it
cultivates and perfects itself, and recalls and withdraws itself from the
contagion of the body. It will therefore also impart being to itself. And
this with great propriety; for all divine natures, and such things as
possess the ability of imparting any thing primarily to others,
necessarily begin this energy from themselves. Of this mighty truth the
sun himself is an illustrious example; for he illuminates all things with
his light, and is himself light, and the fountain and origin of all
splendour. Hence, since the souls imparts life and motion to other
things, on which account Aristotle calls an animal antokincton, self-
moved, it will much more, and by a much greater priority, impart life and
motion to itself.

From this magnificent, sublime, and most scientific doctrine of Plato,
respecting the arcane principle of things and his immediate progeny, it
follows that this ineffable cause is not the immediate maker of the
universe, and this, as I have observed in the Introduction to the Timaeus,
not through any defect, but on the contrary through transcendency of power.
All things indeed are ineffably unfolded from him at once, into light; but
divine media are necessary to the fabrication of the world. For if the
universe was immediately produced from the ineffable, it would, agreeably
to what we have above observed, be ineffable also in a secondary degree.
But as this is by no means the case, it principally derives its immediate
subsistence from a deity of a fabricative characteristic, whom Plato calls
Jupiter, conformably to the theology of Orpheus. The intelligent reader
will readily admit that this dogmas is so far from being derogatory to the
dignity of the Supreme, that on the contrary it exalts that dignity, and,
preserves in a becoming manner the exempt transcendency of the ineffable.
If therefore we presume to celebrate him, for as we have already observed,
it is more becoming to establish in silence those parturitions of the soul
which dare anxiously to explore him, we should celebrate him as the
principle of principles, and the fountain of deity, or in the reverential
language of the Egyptians, as a darkness thrice unknown.[7] Highly laudable
indeed, and worthy the imitation of all posterity, is the veneration which
the great ancients paid to this immense principle. This I have already
noticed in the Introduction to the Parmenides, and I shall only observe at
present in addition, that in consequence of this profound and most pious
reverence of the first God, they did not even venture to give a name to
the summit of that highest order of divinities which is denominated
intelligible. Hence, says Proclus, in his Mss. Scholia on the Cratylus,
"Not every genus of the gods has an appellation; for with respect to the
first Deity, who is beyond all things, Parmenides teaches us that he is
ineffable; and the first genera of the intelligible gods, who are united to
the one, and are called occult, have much of the unknown and ineffable. For
that which is perfectly effable cannot be conjoined with the perfectly
ineffable; but it is necessary that the progression of intelligibles should
terminate in this order, in which the first effable subsists, and that
which is called by proper names. For there the first intelligible forms,
and the intellectual nature of intelligibles, are unfolded into light.
But, the natures prior to this being silent and occult, are only known
by intelligence. Hence the whole of the telestic science energizing
theurgically ascends as far as to this order. Orpheus also says that this
is first called by a name by the other gods; for the light proceeding from
it is known to and denominated by the intellectual gods."

-----------------
[7] Psalm xviii:11; xcvii:2.
-----------------

With no less magnificence therefore than piety, does Proclus thus speak
concerning the ineffable principle of things. "Let us now if ever remove
from ourselves multiform knowledge, exterminate all the variety of life,
and in perfect quiet approach near to the cause of all things. For this
purpose, let not only opinion and phantasy be at rest, nor the passions
alone which impede our anagogic impulse to the first be at peace; but let
the air, and the universe itself, be still. And let all things extend us
with a tranquil power to communion with the ineffable. Let us also
standing there, having transcended the intelligible (if we contain any
thing of this kind), and with nearly closed eyes adoring as it were the
rising sun, since it is not lawful for any being whatever intently to
behold him,--let us survey the sun whence the light of the intelligible
gods proceeds, emerging, as the poets say, from the bosom of the ocean;
and again from this divine tranquillity descending into intellect, and
from intellect employing the reasonings of the soul, let us relate to
ourselves what the natures are from which in this progression we shall
consider the first God as exempt. And let us as it were celebrate him,
not as establishing the earth and the heavens, nor as giving subsistence
to souls, and the generations of all animals; for he produced these
indeed, but among the last of things. But prior to these, let us
celebrate him as unfolding into light the whole intelligible and
intellectual genus of gods, together with all the supermundane and
mundane divinities as, the God of all gods, the Unity of all unities,
and beyond the first adyta--as more ineffable than all silence, and more
unknown than all essence,--as holy among the holies, and concealed in
the intelligible gods." Such is the piety, such the sublimity, and
magnificence of conception, with which the Platonic philosophers speak of
that which is in reality in every respect ineffable, when they presume to
speak about it, extending the ineffable parturitions of the soul to the
ineffable cosensation of the incomprehensible one.

From this sublime veneration of this most awful nature, which, as is
noticed in the extracts from Damascius, induced the most ancient
theologists, philosophers, and poets, to be entirely silent concerning
it, arose the great reverence which the ancients paid to the divinities
even of a mundane characteristic, or from whom bodies are suspended,
considering them also as partaking of the nature of the ineffable, and as
so many links of the truly golden chain of deity. Hence we find in the
Odyssey, when Ulysses and Telemachus are removing the arms from the walls
of the palace of Ithaca, and Minerva going before them with her golden
lamp fills all the place with a divine light,
[Greek:
  . . . . . paroithe de pallas Athene
Chryseon lychnon echrusa phars perikalles epoiei.]

Before thee Pallas Athene bore a golden cresset and cast a most lovely
light. Telemachus having observed that certainly some one of the celestial
gods was present,
[Greek:
  Emala tis deos endon, of ouranon euryn echousi.]

Verily some God is within, of those that hold the wide heaven. Ulysses
says in reply, "Be silent, restrain your intellect (i.e. even cease to
energize intellectually), and speak not."
[Greek:
  Siga, kai kata son noon ischana, med' ereeine.]

Hold thy peace and keep all this in thine heart and ask not hereof.
--Book 19, Odyssey.

Lastly, from all that has been said, it must, I think, be immediately
obvious to every one whose mental eye is not entirely blinded, that there
can be no such thing as a trinity in the theology of Plato, in any respect
analogous to the Christian Trinity. For the highest God, according to
Plato, as we have largely shown from irresistible evidence, is so far from
being a part of a consubsistent triad, that he is not to be connumerated
with any thing; but is so perfectly exempt from all multitude, that he is
even beyond being; and he so ineffably transcends all relation and
habitude, that language is in reality subverted about him, and knowledge
refunded into ignorance. What that trinity however is in the theology of
Plato, which doubtless gave birth to the Christian, will be evident to the
intelligent from the notes on the Parmenides, and the extracts, from
Damascius. And thus much for the doctrine of Plato concerning the principle
of things, and his immediate offspring, the great importance of which will,
I doubt not, be a sufficient apology for the length of this discussion.

In the next place, following Proclus and Olympiodorus as our guides, let us
consider the mode according to which Plato teaches us mystic conceptions of
divine natures: for he appears not to have pursued every where the same
mode of doctrine about these; but sometimes according to a divinely
inspired energy, and at other times dialectically, he evolves the truth
concerning them. And sometimes he symbolically announces their ineffable
idioms, but at other times he recurs to them from images, and discovers in
them the primary causes of wholes. For in the Phaedrus being evidently
inspired, and having exchanged human intelligence for a better possession,
divine mania, he unfolds many arcane dogmas concerning the intellectual,
liberated, and mundane gods. But in the Sophista dialectically contending
about being, and the subsistence of the one above beings, and doubting
against philosophers more ancient than himself, he shows how all beings are
suspended from their cause and the first being, but that being itself
participates of that unity which is exempt from all things, that it is a
passive,[8] one, but not the one itself, being subject to and united to the
one, but not being that which is primarily one. In a similar manner too, in
the Parmenides, he unfolds dialectically the progressions of being from the
one, through the first hypothesis of that dialogue, and this, as he there
asserts, according to the most perfect division of this method. And again
in the Gorgias, he relates the fable concerning the three fabricators, and
their demiurgic allotment. But in the Banquet he speaks concerning the
union of love; and in the Protagoras, about the distribution of mortal
animals from the gods; in a symbolical manner concealing the truth
concerning divine natures, and as far as to mere indication unfolding his
mind to the most genuine of his readers.

-----------------
[8] It is necessary to observe, that, according to Plato, whatever
participates of any thing is said to be passive to that which it
participates, and the participations themselves are called by him passions.
-----------------

Again, if it be necessary to mention the doctrine delivered through the
mathematical disciplines, and the discussion of divine concerns from
ethical or physical discourses, of which many may be contemplated in the
Timaeus, many in the dialogue called Politicus, and many may be seen
scattered in other dialogues; here likewise, to those who are desirous of
knowing divine concerns through images, the method will be apparent. Thus,
for instance, the Politicus shadows forth the fabrication in the heavens.
But the figures of the five elements, delivered in geometrical proportions
in the Timaeus, represent in images the idioms of the gods who preside over
the parts of the universe. And the divisions of the essence of the soul in
that dialogue shadow forth the total orders of the gods. To this we may
also add that Plato composes politics, assimilating them to divine natures,
and adorning them from the whole world and the powers which it contains.
All these, therefore, through the similitude of mortal to divine concerns,
exhibit to us in images the progressions, orders, and fabrications of the
latter. And such are the modes of theologic doctrine employed by Plato.

"But those," says Proclus, "who treat of divine concerns in an indicative
manner, either speak symbolically and fabulously, or through images. And of
those who openly announce their conceptions, some frame their discourses
according to science, but others according to inspiration from the gods.
And he who desires to signify divine concerns through symbols is Orphic,
and, in short, accords with those who write fables respecting the gods.
But he who does this through images is Pythagoric. For the mathematical
disciplines were invented by the Pythagorean in order to a reminiscence of
divine concerns, to which through these as images, they endeavour to
ascend. For they refer both numbers and figures to the gods, according to
the testimony of their historians. But the enthusiastic character, or he
who is divinely inspired, unfolding the truth itself concerning the gods
essentially, perspicuously ranks among the highest initiators. For these do
not think proper to unfold the divine orders, or their idioms, to their
familiars through veils, but announce their powers and their numbers in
consequence of being moved by the gods themselves. But the tradition of
divine concerns according to science is the illustrious, prerogative of the
Platonic philosophy. For Plato alone, as it appears to me of all those who
are known to us, has attempted methodically to divide and reduce into order
the regular progression of the divine genera, their mutual difference, the
common idioms of the total orders, and the distributed idioms in each."

Again, since Plato employs fables, let us in the first place consider
whence the ancients were induced to devise fables, and in the second place,
what the difference is between the fables of philosophers and those of
poets. In answer to the first question then, it is necessary to know that
the ancients employed fables looking to two things, viz. nature, and our
soul. They employed them by looking to nature, and the fabrication of
things, as follows. Things unapparent are believed from things apparent,
and incorporeal natures from bodies. For seeing the orderly arrangement of
bodies, we understand that a certain incorporeal power presides over them;
as with respect to the celestial bodies, they have a certain presiding
motive power. As we therefore see that our body is moved, but is no longer
so after death, we conceive that it was a certain incorporeal power which
moved it. Hence, perceiving that we believe things incorporeal and
unapparent from things apparent and corporeal, fables came to be adopted,
that we might come from things apparent to certain unapparent natures; as,
for instance, that on hearing the adulteries, bonds, and lacerations of the
gods, castrations of heaven, and the like, we may not rest satisfied with
the apparent meaning of such like particulars, but may proceed to the
unapparent, and investigate the true signification. After this manner,
therefore, looking to the nature of things, were fables employed.

But from looking to our souls, they originated as follows: While we are
children we live according to the phantasy, but the phantastic part is
conversant with figures, and types, and things of this kind. That the
phantastic part in us therefore may be preserved, we employ fables in
consequence of this part rejoicing in fables. It may also be said that
a fable is nothing else than a false discourse shadowing forth the truth:
for a fable is the image of truth. But the soul is the image of the
natures prior to herself; and hence the soul very properly rejoices in
fables, as an image in an image. As we are therefore from our childhood
nourished in fables, it is necessary that they should be introduced. And
thus much for the first problem, concerning the origin of fables.

In the next place let us consider what the difference is between the
fables of philosophers and poets. Each therefore has something in which
it abounds more than, and something in which it is deficient from the
other. Thus, for instance, the poetic fable abounds in this, that we must
not rest satisfied with the apparent meaning, but pass on to the occult
truth. For who, endued with intellect, would believe that Jupiter was
desirous of having connection with Juno, and on the ground, without
waiting to go into the bed-chamber. So that the poetic fable abounds, in
consequence of asserting such things as do not suffer us to stop at the
apparent, but lead us to explore the occult truth. But it is defective in
this, that it deceives those of a juvenile age. Plato therefore neglects
fable of this kind, and banishes Homer from his Republic; because youth
on hearing such fables, will not be able to distinguish what is
allegorical from what is not.

Philosophical fables, on the contrary, do not injure those that go no
further than the apparent meaning. Thus, for instance, they assert that
there are punishments and rivers under the earth: and if we adhere to the
literal meaning of these we shall not be injured. But they are deficient
in this, that as their apparent signification does not injure, we often
content ourselves with this, and do not explore the latent truth. We may
also say that philosophic fables look to the enemies of the soul. For if
we were entirely intellect alone, and had no connection with phantasy, we
should not require fables, in consequence of always associating with
intellectual natures. If again, we were entirely irrational, and lived
according to the phantasy, and had no other energy than this, it would be
requisite that the whole of our life should be fabulous. Since, however,
we possess intellect, opinion, and phantasy, demonstrations are given
with a view to intellect; and hence Plato says that if you are willing to
energize according to intellect, you will have demonstrations bound with
adamantine chains; if according to opinion, you will have the testimony
of renowned persons; and if according to the phantasy, you have fables by
which it is excited; so that from all these you will derive advantage.

Plato therefore rejects the more tragical mode of mythologizing of the
ancient poets, who thought proper to establish an arcane theology
respecting the gods, and on this account devised wanderings, castrations,
battles and lacerations of the gods, and many other such symbols of the
truth about divine natures which this theology conceals;--this mode he
rejects, and asserts that it is in every respect most foreign from
erudition. But he considers those mythological discourses about the gods
as more persuasive and more adapted to truth, which assert that a divine
nature is the cause of all good, but of no evil, and that it is void of
all mutation, comprehending in itself the fountain of truth, but never
becoming the cause of any deception to others. For such types of theology
Socrates delivers in the Republic.

All the fables therefore of Plato guarding the truth in concealment,
have not even their externally apparent apparatus discordant with our
undisciplined and unperverted anticipations of divinity. But they bring
with them an image of the mundane composition in which both the apparent
beauty is worthy of divinity, and a beauty more divine than this is
established in the unapparent lives and powers of its causes.

In the next place, that the reader may see whence and from what dialogues
principally the theological dogmas of Plato may be collected, I shall
present him with the following translation of what Proclus has admirably
written on this subject.

"The truth (says he) concerning the gods pervades, as I may say, through
all the Platonic dialogues, and in all of them conceptions of the first
philosophy, venerable, clear, and supernatural, are disseminated, in some
more obscurely, but in others more conspicuously;--conceptions which
excite those that are in any respect able to partake of them, to the
immaterial and separate essence of the gods. And as in each part of the
universe and in nature itself, the demiurgus of all which the world
contains established resemblances of the unknown essence of the gods,
that all things might be converted to divinity through their alliance
with it, in like manner I am of opinion, that the divine intellect of
Plato weaves conceptions about the gods with all its progeny, and leaves
nothing deprived of the mention of divinity, that from the whole of its
offspring a reminiscence of total natures may be obtained, and imparted
to the genuine lovers of divine concerns.

"But if it be requisite to lay before the reader those dialogues out of
many which principally unfold to us the mystic discipline about the gods,
I shall not err in ranking among this number the Phaedo and Phaedrus, the
Banquet and the Philebus, and together with these the Sophista and
Politicus, the Cratylus and the Timaeus. For all these are full through
the whole of themselves, as I may say, of the divine science of Plato.
But I should place in the second rank after these, the fable in the
Gorgias, and that in the Protagoras, likewise the assertions about the
providence of the gods in the Laws, and such things as are delivered
about the Fates, or the mother of the Fates, or the circulations of the
universe, in the tenth book of the Republic. Again you may, if you
please, place in the third rank those Epistles through which we may be
able to arrive at the science about divine natures. For in these, mention
is made of the three kings; and many other divine dogmas worthy the
Platonic theory are delivered. It is necessary therefore, regarding
these, to explore in them each order of the gods.

Thus from the Philebus, we may receive the science respecting the one
good, and the two first principles of things (bound and infinity) together
with the triad subsisting from these. For you will find all these
distinctly delivered to us by Plato in that dialogue. But from the Timaeus
you may obtain the theory about intelligibles, a divine narration about the
demiurgic monad, and the most full truth about the mundane gods. From the
Phaedrus you may learn all the intelligible and intellectual genera, and
the liberated orders of the gods, which are proximately established above
the celestial circulations. From the Politicus you may obtain the theory of
the fabrication in the heavens, of the periods of the universe, and of the
intellectual causes of those periods. But from the Sophista you may learn
the whole sublunary generation, and the idiom of the gods who are allotted
the sublunary region, and preside over its generations and corruptions. And
with respect to each of the gods, we may obtain many sacred conceptions
from the Banquet, many from the Cratylus, and many from the Phaedo. For in
each of these dialogues more or less mention is made of divine names, from
which it is easy for those who are exorcised in divine concerns to discover
by a reasoning process the idioms of each.

"It is necessary, however, to evince that each of the dogmas accords with
Platonic principles and the mystic traditions of theologists. For all the
Grecian theology is the progeny of the mystic doctrine of Orpheus;
Pythagoras first of all learning from Aglaophemus the origins of the
gods, but Plato in the second place receiving an all-perfect science of
the divinities from the Pythagoric and Orphic writings. For in the
Philebus, referring the theory about the two forms of principles (bound
and infinity) to the Pythagoreans, he calls them men dwelling with the
gods, and truly blessed. Philolaus, therefore, the Pythagorean, has left
for us in writing admirable conceptions about these principles,
celebrating their common progression into beings, and their separate
fabrication. Again, in the Timaeus, endeavouring to teach us about the
sublunary gods and their order, Plato flies to theologists, calls them
the sons of the gods, and makes them the fathers of the truth about these
divinities. And lastly, he delivers the orders of the sublunary gods
proceeding from wholes, according to the progression delivered by
theologists of the intellectual kings. Further still, in the Cratylus he
follows the traditions of theologists respecting the order of the divine
processions. But in the Gorgias he adopts the Homeric dogma, respecting
the triadic hypostases of the demiurgi. And, in short, he every where
discourses concerning the gods agreeably to the principles of theologists;
rejecting indeed the tragical part of mythological fiction, but establishing
first hypotheses in common with the authors of fables.

"Perhaps, however, some one may here object to us, that we do not in a
proper manner exhibit the every where dispersed theology of Plato, and that
we endeavour to heap together different particulars from different
dialogues, as if we were studious of collecting many things into one
mixture, instead of deriving them all from one and the same fountain. For
if this were our intention, we might indeed refer different dogmas to
different treatises of Plato, but we shall by no means have a precedaneous
doctrine concerning the gods, nor will there be any dialogue which presents
us with an all-perfect and entire procession of the divine genera, and
their coordination with each other. But we shall be similar to those who
endeavor to obtain a whole from parts, through the want of a whole prior[9]
to parts, and to weave together the perfect, from things imperfect, when,
on the contrary, the imperfect ought to have the first cause of its
generation in the perfect. For the Timaeus, for instance, will teach us the
theory of the intelligible genera, and the Phaedrus appears to present us
with a regular account of the first intellectual orders. But where will be
the coordination of intellectuals to intelligibles? And what will be the
generation of second from first natures? In short, after what manner the
progression of the divine orders takes place from the one principle of all
things, and how in the generations of the gods, the orders between the one,
and all-perfect number, are filled up, we shall be unable to evince.

-----------------
[9] A whole prior to parts is that which causally contains parts in
itself. Such parts too, when they proceed from their occult causal
subsistence, and have a distinct being of their own, are nevertheless
comprehended, though in a different manner, in their producing whole.
-----------------

"Further still, it may be said, where will be the venerableness of your
boasted science about divine natures? For it is absurd to call these
dogmas, which are collected from many places, Platonic, and which, as you
acknowledge, are reduced from foreign names to the philosophy of Plato;
nor are you able to evince the whole entire truth about divine natures.
Perhaps, indeed, they will say that certain persons, junior to Plato,
have delivered in their writings, and left to their disciples, one
perfect form of philosophy. You, therefore, are able to produce one
entire theory about nature from the Timaeus; but from the Republic, or
Laws, the most beautiful dogmas about morals, and which tend to one form
of philosophy. Alone, therefore, neglecting the treatise of Plato, which
contains all the good of the first philosophy, and which may be called
the summit of the whole theory, you will be deprived of the most perfect
knowledge of beings, unless you are so much infatuated as to boast on
account of fabulous fictions, though an analysis of things of this kind
abounds with much of the probable, but not of the demonstrative. Besides,
things of this kind are only delivered adventitiously in the Platonic
dialogues; as the fable in the Protagoras, which is inserted for the sake
of the political science, and the demonstrations respecting it. In like
manner the fable in the Republic is inserted for the sake of justice; and
in the Gorgias for the sake of temperance. For Plato combines fabulous
narrations with investigations of ethical dogmas, not for the sake of the
fables, but for the sake of the leading design, that we may not only
exercise the intellectual part of the soul, through contending reasons,
but that the divine part of the soul may more perfectly receive the
knowledge of beings, through its sympathy with more mystic concerns.
For from other discourses we resemble those who are compelled to the
reception of truth; but from fables we are affected in an ineffable
manner, and call forth our unperverted conceptions, venerating the mystic
information which they contain.

"Hence, as it appears to me, Timaeus with great propriety thinks it fit
that we should produce the divine genera, following the inventors of
fables as sons of the gods, and subscribe to their always generating
secondary natures from such as are first, though they should speak
without demonstration. For this kind of discourse is not demonstrative,
but entheastic, or the progeny of divine inspiration; and was invented by
the ancients, not through necessity, but for the sake of persuasion, not
regarding naked discipline, but sympathy with things themselves. But if
you are willing to speculate not only the causes of fables, but of other
theological dogmas, you will find that some of them are scattered in the
Platonic dialogues for the sake of ethical, and others for the sake of
physical considerations. For in the Philebus, Plato discourses concerning
bound and infinity, for the sake of pleasure, and a life according to
intellect. For I think the latter are species of the former. In the
Timaeus the discourse about the intelligible gods is assumed for the sake
of the proposed physiology. On which account, it is every where necessary
that images should be known from paradigms, but that the paradigms of
material things should be immaterial, of sensibles, intelligible, and of
physical forms, separate from nature. But in the Phaedrus, Plato
celebrates the supercelestial place, the subcelestial profundity, and
every genus under this for the sake of amatory mania; the manner in which
the reminiscence of souls takes place; and the passage to these from
hence. Every where, however, the leading end, as I may say, is either
physical or political, while the conceptions about divine natures are
introduced either for the sake of invention or perfection. How, therefore,
can such a theory as yours be any longer venerable and supernatural, and
worthy to be studied beyond every thing, when it is neither able to
evince the whole in itself, nor the perfect, nor that which is
precedaneous in the writings of Plato, but is destitute of all these, is
violent and not spontaneous, and does not possess a genuine, but an
adventitious order, as in a drama? And such are the particulars which may
be urged against our design.

"To this objection I shall make a just and perspicuous reply. I say then
that Plato every where discourses about the gods agreeably to ancient
opinions and the nature of things. And sometimes indeed, for the sake of
the cause of the things proposed, he reduces them to the principles of
the dogmas, and thence, as from an exalted place of survey, contemplates
the nature of the thing proposed. But some times he establishes the
theological science as the leading end. For in the Phaedrus, his subject
respects intelligible beauty, and the participation of beauty pervading
thence through all things; and in the Banquet it respects the amatory
order.

"But if it be necessary to consider, in one Platonic dialogue, the
all-perfect, whole and connected, extending as far as to the complete
number of theology, I shall perhaps assert a paradox, and which will
alone be apparent to our familiars. We ought however to dare, since we
have begun the assertion, and affirm against our opponents, that the
Parmenides, and the mystic conceptions of this dialogue, will accomplish
all you desire. For in this dialogue, all the divine genera proceed in
order from the first cause, and evince their mutual suspension from each
other. And those indeed which are highest, connate with the one, and of
a primary nature, are allotted a form of subsistence, characterized by
unity, occult and simple; but such as are last are multiplied, are
distributed into many parts, and excel in number, but are inferior in
power to such as are of a higher order; and such as are middle, according
to a convenient proportion, are more composite than their causes, but
more simple than their proper progeny. And, in short, all the axioms of
the theological science appear in perfection in this dialogue; and all
the divine orders are exhibited subsisting in connection. So that this
is nothing else than the celebrated generation of the gods, and the
procession of every kind of being from the ineffable and unknown cause of
wholes.[10] The Parmenides therefore, enkindles in the lovers of Plato
the whole and perfect light of the theological science. But after this,
the aforementioned dialogues distribute parts of the mystic discipline
about the gods, and all of them, as I may say, participate of divine
wisdom, and excite our spontaneous conceptions respecting a divine nature.

------------------
[10] The principle of all things is celebrated by Platonic philosophy as
the cause of wholes, because through transcendency of power he first
produces those powers in the universe which rank as wholes, and afterward
those which rank as parts through these. Agreeably to this Jupiter, the
artificer of the universe, is almost always called [Greek: demiourgos ton
olon], the demiurgus of wholes. See the Timaeus, and the Introduction to it.
------------------

And it is necessary to refer all the parts of this mystic discipline to
these dialogues, and these again to the one and all perfect theory of the
Parmenides. For thus, as it appears to me, we shall suspend the more
imperfect from the perfect, and parts from wholes, and shall exhibit
reasons assimilated to things of which, according to the Platonic Timaeus,
they are interpreters. Such then is our answer to the objection which may
be urged against us; and thus we refer the Platonic theory to the
Parmenides; just as the Timaeus is acknowledged by all who have the least
degree of intelligence to contain the whole science about nature."

All that is here asserted by Proclus will be immediately admitted by the
reader who understands the outlines which we have here given of the
theology of Plato, and who is besides this a complete master of the
mystic meaning of the Parmenides; which I trust he will find sufficiently
unfolded, through the assistance of Proclus, in the introduction and
notes to that dialogue.

The next important Platonic dogma in order, is that doctrine concerning
ideas, about which the reader will find so much said in the notes on the
Parmenides, that but little remains to be added here. That little however
is as follows: The divine Pythagoras, and all those who have legitimately
received his doctrines, among whom Plato holds the most distinguished
rank, asserted that there are many orders of beings, viz. intelligible,
intellectual, dianoetic, physical, or in short, vital and corporeal
essences. For the progression of things, the subjection which naturally
subsists together with such progression, and the power of diversity in
coordinate genera give subsistence to all the multitude of corporeal and
incorporeal natures. They said, therefore, that there are three orders in
the whole extent of beings; viz. the intelligible, the dianoetic, and the
sensible; and that in each of these ideas subsist, characterized by the
respective essential properties of the natures by which they are
contained. And with respect to intelligible ideas, these they placed
among divine natures, together with the producing, paradigmatic, and
final causes of things in a consequent order. For if these three causes
sometimes concur, and are united among themselves, (which Aristotle says
is the case), without doubt this will not happen in the lowest works of
nature, but in the first and most excellent causes of all things, which
on account of their exuberant fecundity have a power generative of all
things, and from their converting and rendering similar to themselves the
natures which they have generated, are the paradigms, or exemplars of all
things. But as these divine causes act for their own sake, and on account
of their own goodness, do they not exhibit the final cause? Since
therefore intelligible forms are of this kind, and are the leaders of so
much good to wholes, they give completion to the divine orders, though
they largely subsist about the intelligible order contained in the
artificer of the universe. But dianoetic forms or ideas imitate the
intellectual, which have a prior subsistence, render the order of soul
similar to the intellectual order, and comprehend all things in a
secondary degree.

These forms beheld in divine natures possess a fabricative power, but
with us they are only gnostic, and no longer demiurgic, through the
defluxion of our wings, or degradation of our intellectual powers. For,
as Plato says in the Phaedrus, when the winged powers of the soul are
perfect and plumed for flight, she dwells on high, and in conjunction
with divine natures governs the world. In the Timaeus, he manifestly
asserts that the demiurgus implanted these dianoetic forms in souls, in
geometric, arithmetic, and harmonic proportions: but in his Republic (in
the section of a line in the 6th book) he calls them images of
intelligibles; and on this account does not for the most part disdain to
denominate them intellectual, as being the exemplars of sensible natures.
In the Phaedo he says that these are the causes to us of reminiscence;
because disciplines are nothing else than reminiscences of middle
dianoetic forms, from which the productive powers of nature being derived
and inspired, give birth to all the mundane phenomena.

Plato however did not consider things definable, or in modern language
abstract ideas, as the only universals, but prior to these he established
those principles productive of science which essentially reside in the
soul, as is evident from his Phaedrus and Phaedo. In the 10th book of the
Republic too, he venerates those separate forms which subsist in a divine
intellect. In the Phaedrus, he asserts that souls elevated to the
supercelestial place, behold Justice herself, temperance herself, and
science herself; and lastly in the Phaedo he evinces the immortality of
the soul from the hypothesis of separate forms.

Syrianus[11], in his commentary on the 13th book of Aristotle's
Metaphysics, shows in defense of Socrates, Plato, the Parmenideans,
and Pythagoreans, that ideas were not introduced by these divine men
according to the usual meaning of names, as was the opinion of Chrysippus,
Archedemus, and many of the junior Stoics; for ideas are distinguished by
many differences from things which are denominated from custom. Nor do
they subsist, says he, together with intellect, in the same manner as
those slender conceptions which are denominated universals abstracted
from sensibles, according to the hypothesis of Longinus:[12] for if that
which subsists is unsubstantial, it cannot be consubsistent with intellect.

-----------------
[11] See my translation of Aristotle's Metaphysics, p. 347. If the reader
conjoins what is said concerning ideas in the notes on that work, with
the introduction and notes to the Parmenides in this, he will be in
possession of nearly all that is to be found in the writings of the
ancients on this subject.

[12] It appears from this passage of Syrianus that Longinus was the
original inventor of the theory of abstract ideas; and that Mr. Locke was
merely the restorer of it.
-----------------

Nor are ideas according to these men notions, as Cleanthes afterwards
asserted them to be. Nor is idea definite reason, nor material form; for
these subsist in composition and division, and verge to matter. But ideas
are perfect, simple, immaterial, and impartible natures. And what wonder
is there, says Syrianus, if we should separate things which are so much
distant from each other? Since neither do we imitate in this particular
Plutarch, Atticus, and Democritus, who, because universal reasons
perpetually subsist in the essence of the soul, were of opinion that these
reasons are ideas: for though they separate them from the universal in
sensible natures, yet it is not proper to conjoin in one and the same the
reason of soul, and an intellect such as ours, with paradigmatic and
immaterial forms, and demiurgic intellections. But as the divine Plato
says, it is the province of our soul to collect things into one by a
reasoning process, and to possess a reminiscence of those transcendent
spectacles, which we once beheld when governing the universe in conjunction
with divinity. Boethus,[13] the peripatetic too, with whom it is proper to
join Cornutus; thought that ideas are the same with universals in sensible
natures. However, whether these universals are prior to particulars, they
are not prior in such a manner as to be denudated from the habitude which
they possess with respect to them, nor do they subsist as the causes of
particulars; both which are the prerogatives of ideas; or whether they are
posterior to particulars, as many are accustomed to call them, how can
things of posterior origin, which have no essential subsistence, but are
nothing more than slender conceptions, sustain the dignity of fabricative
ideas?

-------------------
[13] This was a Greek philosopher, who is often cited by Simplicius in
his Commentary on the Predicaments, and must not therefore be confounded
with Boetius, the roman senator and philosopher.
-------------------

In what manner then, says Syrianus, do ideas subsist according to the
contemplative lovers of truth? We reply, intelligibly and tetradically
([Greek: noeros kai tetradikos]), in animal itself ([Greek: en to
antozoo]), or the extremity of the intelligible order; but intellectually
and decadically ([Greek: noeros kai dekadikos]), in the intellect of the
artificer of the universe; for, according to the Pythagoric Hymn, "Divine
number proceeds from the retreats of the undecaying monad, till it arrives
at the divine tetrad which produced the mother of all things, the universal
recipient, venerable, circularly investing all things with bound, immovable
and unwearied, and which is denominated the sacred decad, both by the
immortal gods and earth-born men."

[Greek:
Proeisi gar o Theios arithmos, os phesin o Pythagoreios eis auton
umnos,
  Monados ek keuthmonos akeralou esti'an iketai
  Tetrada epi zatheen, he de teke metera panton,
  Pandechea, presbeiran, oron peri pasi titheiran,
  Atropon, akamatou, dekada kleiousi min agnen,
  Athanatoi to theoi kai gegeneeis anthropoi.]

And such is the mode of their subsistence according to Orpheus,
Pythagoras and Plato. Or if it be requisite to speak in more familiar
language, an intellect sufficient to itself, and which is a most perfect
cause, presides over the wholes of the universe, and through these
governs all its parts; but at the same time that it fabricates all
mundane natures, and benefits them by its providential energies, it
preserves its own most divine and immaculate purity; and while it
illuminates all things, is not mingled with the natures which it
illuminates. This intellect, therefore, comprehending in the depths of
its essence an ideal world, replete with all various forms, excludes
privation of cause and casual subsistence, from its energy. But as it
imparts every good and all possible beauty to its fabrications, it
converts the universe to itself, and renders it similar to its own
omniform nature. Its energy, too, is such as its intellection; but it
understands all things, since it is most perfect. Hence there is not any
thing which ranks among true beings, that is not comprehended in the
essence of intellect; but it always establishes in itself ideas, which
are not different from itself and its essence, but give completion to it,
and introduce to the whole of things, a cause which is at the same time
productive, paradigmatic, and final. For it energizes as intellect, and
the ideas which it contains are paradigmatic, as being forms; and they
energize from themselves, and according to their own exuberant goodness.
And such are the Platonic dogmas concerning ideas, which sophistry and
ignorance may indeed oppose, but will never be able to confute.

From this intelligible world, replete with omniform ideas, this sensible
world, according to Plato, perpetually flows, depending on its artificer
intellect, in the same manner as shadow on its forming substance. For as
a deity of an intellectual characteristic is its fabricator, and both the
essence and energy of intellect are established in eternity the sensible
universe, which is the effect or production of such an energy, must be
consubsistent with its cause, or in other words, must be a perpetual
emanation from it. This will be evident from considering that every thing
which is generated, is either generated by art or by nature, or according
to power. It is necessary, therefore, that every thing operating
according to nature or art should be prior to the things produced; but
that things operating according to power should have their productions
coexistent with themselves; just as the sun produces light coexistent
with itself; fire, heat; and snow, coldness. If therefore the artificer
of the universe produced it by art, he would not cause it simply to be,
but to be in some particular manner; for all art produces form. Whence
therefore does the world derive its being? If he produced it from nature,
since that which makes by nature imparts something of itself to its
productions, and the maker of the world is incorporeal, it would be
necessary that the world, the offspring of such an energy, should be
incorporeal. It remains therefore, that the demiurgus produced the
universe by power alone; but every thing generated by power subsists
together with the cause containing this power: and hence production of
this kind cannot be destroyed unless the producing cause is deprived of
power. The divine intellect therefore that produced the sensible universe
caused it to be coexistent with himself.

This world thus depending on its divine artificer, who is himself an
intelligible world replete with the archetypal ideas of all things,
considered according to its corporeal nature, is perpetually flowing, and
perpetually advancing to being (en to gignesthai), and compared with its
paradigm, has no stability or reality of being. However, considered as
animated by a divine soul, and as receiving the illuminations of all the
supermundane gods, and being itself the receptacle of divinities from
whom bodies are suspended, it is said by Plato in the Timaeus to be a
blessed god. The great body of this world too, which subsists in a
perpetual dispersion of temporal extension, may be properly called a
whole with a total subsistence, on account of the perpetuity of its
duration, though this is nothing more than a flowing eternity. And hence
Plato calls it a whole of wholes; by the other wholes which are
comprehended in its meaning, the celestial spheres, the sphere of fire,
the whole of air considered as one great orb; the whole earth, and the
whole sea. These spheres, which are called by Platonic writers parts with
a total subsistence, are considered by Plato as aggoregately perpetual.
For if the body of this world is perpetual, this also must be the case
with its larger parts, on account of their exquisite alliance to it, and
in order that wholes with a partial subsistence, such as all individuals,
may rank in the last gradation of things.

As the world too, considered as one great comprehending whole, is called
by Plato a divine animal, so likewise every whole which it contains is a
world, possessing in the first place, a self-perfect unity; proceeding
from the ineffable, by which it becomes a god; in the second place, a
divine intellect; in the third place, a divine soul; and in the last
place, a deified body. Hence each of these wholes is the producing cause
of all the multitude which it contains, and on this account is said to be
a whole prior to parts; because, considered as possessing an eternal form
which holds all its parts together, and gives to the whole perpetuity of
subsistence, it is not indigent of such parts to the perfection of its
being. That these wholes which rank thus high in the universe are
animated, must follow by a geometrical necessity. For, as Theophrastus
well observes, wholes would possess less authority than parts, and things
eternal than such as are corruptible, if deprived of the possession
of soul.

And now having with venturous, yet unpresuming wing, ascended to the
ineffable principle of things, and standing with every eye closed in the
vestibules of the adytum, found that we could announce nothing concerning
him, but only indicate our doubts and disappointment, and having thence
descended to his occult and most venerable progeny, and passing through
the luminous world of ideas, holding fast by the golden chain of deity,
terminated our downward flight in the material universe, and its
undecaying wholes, let us stop awhile and contemplate the sublimity and
magnificence of the scene which this journey presents to our view. Here
then we see the vast empire of deity, an empire terminated upwards by a
principle so ineffable that all language is subverted about it, and
downwards, by the vast body of the world. Immediately subsisting after
this immense unknown we in the next place behold a mighty all-
comprehending one, which as being next to that which is in every
respect incomprehensible, possesses much of the ineffable and unknown.
From this principle of principles, in which all things casually subsist
absorbed in superessential light and involved in unfathomable depths, we
view a beauteous progeny of principles, all largely partaking of the
ineffable, all stamped with the occult characters of deity, all
possessing an over-flowing fullness of good. From these dazzling summits,
these ineffable blossoms, these divine propagations, we next see being,
life, intellect, soul, nature and body depending; monads suspended from
unities, deified natures proceeding from deities. Each of these monads
too, is the leader of a series which extends from itself to the last of
things, and which while it proceeds from, at the same time abides in, and
returns to its leader. And all these principles and all their progeny are
finally centred, and rooted by their summits in the first great all-
comprehending one. Thus all beings proceed from, and are comprehended
in the first being; all intellects emanate from one first intellect; all
souls from one first soul; all natures blossom from one first nature; and
all bodies proceed from the vital and luminous body of the world. And
lastly, all these great monads are comprehended in the first one, from
which both they and all their depending series are unfolded into light.
Hence this first one is truly the unity of unities, the monad of monads,
the principle of principles, the God of gods, one and all things, and yet
one prior to all.

Such, according to Plato, are the flights of the true philosopher, such
the August and magnificent scene which presents itself to his view. By
ascending these luminous heights, the spontaneous tendencies of the soul
to deity alone find the adequate object of their desire; investigation
here alone finally reposes, doubt expires in certainty, and knowledge
loses itself in the ineffable.

And here perhaps some grave objector, whose little soul is indeed acute,
but sees nothing with a vision healthy and sound, will say that all this
is very magnificent, but that it is soaring too high for man; that it is
merely the effect of spiritual pride; that no truths, either in morality
or theology, are of any importance which are not adapted to the level of
the meanest capacity; and that all that it is necessary for man to know
concerning either God or himself is so plain, that he that runs may read.
In answer to such like cant, for it is nothing more,--a cant produced by
the most profound ignorance, and frequently attended with the most
deplorable envy, I ask, is then the Delphic precept, KNOW THYSELF, a
trivial mandate? Can this be accomplished by every man? Or can any one
properly know himself without knowing the rank he holds in the scale of
being? And can this be effected without knowing what are the natures
which he surpasses, and what those are by which he is surpassed? And can
he know this without knowing as much of those natures as it is possible
for him to know? And will the objector be hardy enough to say that every
man is equal to this arduous task? That he who rushes from the forge, or
the mines, with a soul distorted, crushed and bruised by base mechanical
arts, and madly presumes to teach theology to a deluded audience, is
master of this sublime, this most important science? For my own part I
know of no truths which are thus obvious, thus accessible to every man,
but axioms, those self-evident principles of science which are
conspicuous by their own light, which are the spontaneous unperverted
conceptions of the soul, and to which he who does not assent deserves, as
Aristotle justly remarks, either pity or correction. In short, if this is
to be the criterion of all moral and theological knowledge, that it must
be immediately obvious to every man, that it is to be apprehended by the
most careless inspection, what occasion is there for seminaries of
learning? Education is ridiculous, the toil of investigation is idle. Let
us at once confine Wisdom in the dungeons of Folly, recall Ignorance from
her barbarous wilds, and close the gates of Science with
everlasting bars.

Having thus taken a general survey of the great world, and descended from
the intelligible to the sensible universe, let us still, adhering to that
golden chain which is bound round the summit of Olympus, and from which
all things are suspended, descend to the microcosm man. For man
comprehends in himself partially everything which the world contains
divinely and totally. Hence, according to Pluto, he is endued with an
intellect subsisting in energy, and a rational soul proceeding from the
same father and vivific goddess as were the causes of the intellect and
soul of the universe. He has likewise an ethereal vehicle analogous to
the heavens, and a terrestrial body, composed from the four elements, and
with which also it is coordinate.

With respect to his rational part, for in this the essence of man
consists, we have already shown that it is of a self-motive nature, and
that it subsists between intellect, which is immovable both in essence
and energy, and nature, which both moves and is moved. In consequence of
this middle subsistence, the mundane soul, from which all partial souls
are derived, is said by Plato in the Timaeus, to be a medium between that
which is indivisible and that which is divisible about bodies, i.e. the
mundane soul is a medium between the mundane intellect, and the whole of
that corporeal life which the world participates. In like manner, the
human soul is a medium between a daemoniacal intellect proximately,
established above our essence, which it also elevates and perfects, and
that corporeal life which is distributed about our body, and which is
the cause of its generation, nutrition and increase. This daemoniacal
intellect is called by Plato, in the Phaedrus, theoretic and, the
governor of the soul. The highest part therefore of the human soul is the
summit of the dianoetic power ([Greek: to akrotaton tes dianoias]), or
that power which reasons scientifically; and this summit is our intellect.
As, however, our very essence is characterized by reason, this our summit
is rational, and though it subsists in energy, yet it has a remitted union
with things themselves. Though too it energizes from itself, and contains
intelligibles in its essence, yet from its alliance to the discursive
nature of soul, and its inclination to that which is divisible, it falls
short of the perfection of an intellectual essence and energy profoundly
indivisible and united, and the intelligibles which it contains degenerate
from the transcendently fulged and self-luminous nature of first
intelligibles. Hence, in obtaining a perfectly indivisible knowledge, it
requires to be perfected by an intellect whose energy is ever vigilant
and unremitted; and it's intelligibles, that they may become perfect,
are indigent of the light which proceeds from separate intelligibles.
Aristotle, therefore, very properly compares the intelligibles of our
intellect to colors, because these require the splendour of the sun, and
denominates an intellect of this kind, intellect in capacity, both on
account of its subordination to an essential intellect, and because it is
from a separate intellect that it receives the full perfection of its
nature. The middle part of the rational soul is called by Plato, dianoia,
and is that power which, as we have already said, reasons scientifically,
deriving the principles of its reasoning, which are axioms from intellect.
And the extremity of the rational soul is opinion, which in his Sophista
he defines to be that power which knows the conclusion of dianoia. This
power also knows the universal in sensible particulars, as that every man
is a biped, but it knows only the oti, or that a thing is, but is ignorant
of the dioti, or why it is: knowledge of the latter kind being the province
of the dianoetic power.

And such is Plato's division of the rational part of our nature, which he
very justly considers as the true man; the essence of every thing
consisting in its most excellent part.

After this follows the irrational nature, the summit of which is the
phantasy, or that power which perceives every thing accompanied with
figure and interval; and on this account it may be called a figured
intelligence ([Greek: morphotike noesis]). This power, as Jamblichus
beautifully observes, groups upon, as it were, and fashions all the
powers of the soul; exciting in opinion the illuminations from the
senses, and fixing in that life which is extended with body, the
impressions which descend from intellect. Hence, slays Proclus, it folds
itself about the indivisibility of true intellect, conforms itself to all
formless species, and becomes perfectly every thing, from which the
dianoetic power and our indivisible reason consists. Hence too, it is all
things passively which intellect is impassively, and on this account
Aristotle calls it passive intellect. Under this subsist anger and
desire, the former resembling a raging lion, and the latter a many-headed
beast; and the whole is bounded by sense, which is nothing more than a
passive perception of things, and on this account is justly said by
Plato, to be rather passion than knowledge; since the former of these is
characterized by alertness, and the latter by energy.

Further still, in order that the union of the soul with this gross
terrestrial body may be effected in a becoming manner, two vehicles,
according to Plato, are necessary as media, one of which is ethereal, and
the other aerial, and of these, the ethereal vehicle is simple and
immaterial, but the aerial, simple and material; and this dense earthly
body is composite and material.

The soul thus subsisting as a medium between natures impartible
and such as are divided about bodies, it produces and constitutes the
latter of these; but establishes in itself the prior causes from which it
proceeds. Hence it previously receives, after the manner of an exemplar,
the natures to which it is prior as their cause; but it possesses through
participation, and as the blossoms of first natures, the causes of its
subsistence. Hence it contains in its essence immaterial forms of things
material, incorporeal of such as are corporeal, and extended of such as
are distinguished by interval. But it contains intelligibles after the
manner of an image, and receives partibly their impartible forms, such
as are uniform variously, and such as are immovable, according to a
self-motive condition. Soul therefore is all things, and is elegantly
said by Olympiodorus to be an omniform statue ([Greek: pammorphon
agalma]): for it contains such things as are first through participation,
but such as are posterior to its nature, after the manner of an exemplar.

As, too, it is always moved; and this always is not eternal, but
temporal, for that which is properly eternal, and such is intellect, is
perfectly stable, and has no transitive energies, hence it is necessary
that its motions should be periodic. For motion is a certain mutation
from some things into others. And beings are terminated by multitudes and
magnitudes. These therefore being terminated, there can neither be an
infinite mutation, according to a right line, nor can that which is
always moved proceed according to a finished progression. Hence that
which is always moved will proceed from the same to the same; and will
thus form a periodic motion. Hence, too, the human, and this also is true
of every mundane soul, uses periods and restitutions of its proper life.
For, in consequence of being measured by time, it energizes transitively,
and possesses a proper motion. But every thing which is moved perpetually
and participates of time, revolves periodically and proceeds from the
same to the same. And hence the soul, from possessing motion, and
energizing according to time, will both possess periods of motion and
restitutions to its pristine state.

Again, as the human soul, according to Plato, ranks among the number of
those souls that sometimes follow the mundane divinities, in consequence
of subsisting immediately after daemons and heroes, the perpetual
attendants of the gods, hence it possesses a power of descending
infinitely into generation, or the sublunary region, and of ascending
from generation to real being. For since it does not reside with divinity
through an infinite time, neither will it be conversant with bodies
through the whole succeeding time. For that which has no temporal
beginning, both according to Plato and Aristotle, cannot have an end; and
that which has no end, is necessarily without a beginning. It remains,
therefore, that every soul must perform periods, both of ascensions from
generation, and of descensions into generation; and that this will never
fail, through an infinite time.

From all this it follows that the soul, while an inhabitant of earth, is
in a fallen condition, an apostate from deity, an exile from the orb of
light. Hence Plato, in the 7th book of his Republic, considering our life
with reference to erudition and the want of it, assimilates us to men in
a subterranean cavern, who have been there confined from their childhood,
and so fettered by chains as to be only able to look before them to the
entrance of the cave which expands to the light, but incapable through
the chain of turning themselves round. He supposes too, that they have
the light of a fire burning far above and behind them; and that between
the fire and the fettered men, there is a road above, along which a low
wall is built. On this wall are seen men bearing utensils of every kind,
and statues in wood and stone of men and other animals. And of these men
some are speaking and others silent. With respect to the fettered men in
this cave, they see nothing of themselves or another, or of what is
carrying along, but the shadows formed by the fire falling on the
opposite part of tho cave. He supposes too, that the opposite part of
this prison has an echo; and that in consequence of this the fettered
men, when they hear any one speak, will imagine that it is nothing else
than the passing shadow.

Here, in the first place, as we have observed in the notes on that book,
the road above between the fire and the fettered men, indicates that
there is a certain ascent in the cave itself from a more abject to a more
elevated life. By this ascent, therefore Plato signifies the contemplation
of dianoetic objects in the mathematical disciplines. For as the shadows
in the cave correspond to the shadows of visible objects, and visible
objects are the immediate images of dianoetic forms, or those ideas which
the soul essentially participates, it is evident that the objects from
which these shadows are formed must correspond to such as are dianoetic.
It is requisite, therefore, that the dianoetic power exercising itself in
these, should draw forth the principles of these from their latent
retreats, and should contemplate them not in images, but as subsisting in
herself in impartible involution.

In the next place he says, "that the man who is to be led from the cave
will more easily see what the heavens contain, and the heavens
themselves, by looking in the night to the light of the stars, and the
moon, than by day looking on the sun, and the light of the sun." By this
he signifies the contemplation of intelligibles: for the stars and their
light are imitations of intelligibles, so far as all of them partake of
the form of the sun, in the same manner as intelligibles are
characterized by the nature of the good.

After the contemplation of these, and after the eye is accustomed through
these to the light, as it is requisite in the visible region to see the
sun himself in the last place, in like manner, according to Plato, the
idea of the good must be seen the last in the intelligible region. He,
likewise divinely adds, that it is scarcely to be seen; for we can only
be conjoined with it through the intelligible, in the vestibule of which
it is beheld by the ascending soul.

In short, the cold, according to Plato, can only be restored while on
earth to the divine likeness, which she abandoned by her descent, and be
able after death to reascend to the intelligible world, by the exercise
of the cathartic and theoretic virtues; the former purifying her from the
defilements of a mortal nature, and the latter elevating her to the
vision of true being: for thus, as Plato says in the Timaeus, "the soul
becoming sane and entire, will arrive at the form of her pristine habit."
The cathartic, however, must necessarily precede the theoretic virtues;
since it is impossible to survey truth while subject to the perturbation
and tumult of the passions. For the rational soul subsisting as a medium
between intellect and the irrational nature, can then only without
revulsion associate with the intellect prior to herself, when she becomes
pure from copassivity with inferior natures. By the cathartic virtues,
therefore, we become sane, in consequence of being liberated from the
passions as diseases; but we become entire by the reassumption of
intellect and science as of our proper parts; and this is effected by
contemplative truth. Plato also clearly teaches us that our apostacy from
better natures is only to be healed by a flight from hence, when he
defines in his Theaetetus philosophy to be a flight from terrestrial
evils: for he evinces by this that passions are connascent with mortals
alone. He likewise says in the same dialogue, "that neither can evil
be abolished, nor yet do they subsist with the gods, but that they
necessarily revolve about this terrene abode, and a mortal nature." For
those who are obnoxious to generation and corruption can also be affected
in a manner contrary to nature, which is the beginning of evils. But in
the same dialogue he subjoins the mode by which our flight from evil
is to be accomplished. "It is necessary," says he "to fly from hence
thither: but the flight is a similitude to divinity, as far as is
possible to man; and this similitude consists in becoming just and holy
in conjunction with intellectual prudence." For it is necessary that he
who wishes to run from evils, should in the first place turn away from a
mortal nature; since it is not possible for those who are mingled with it
to avoid being filled with its attendant evils. As therefore, through our
flight from divinity, and the defluction of those wings which elevate us
on high, we fell into this mortal abode, and thus became connected with
evils, so by abandoning passivity with a mortal nature, and by the
germination of the virtues, as of certain wings, we return to the abode
of pure and true good, and to the possession of divine felicity. For the
essence of many subsisting as a medium between daemoniacal natures, who
always have an intellectual knowledge of divinity, and those beings who
are never adapted by nature to understand him, it ascends to the former
and descends to the latter, through the possession and desertion of
intellect. For it becomes familiar both with the divine and brutal
likeness, through the amphibious condition of its nature.

When the soul therefore has recovered her pristine perfection in as great
a degree as is possible, while she is an inhabitant of earth by the
exercise of the cathartic and theoretic virtues, she returns after death,
as he says in the Timaeus, to her kindred star, from which she fell, and
enjoys a blessed life. Then, too, as he says in the Phaedrus, being
winged, she governs the world in conjunction with the gods. And this
indeed is the most beautiful end of her labors. This is what he calls in
the Phaedo, a great contest and a mighty hope. This is the most perfect
fruit of philosophy to familiarize and lead her back to things truly
beautiful, to liberate her from this terrene abode as from a certain
subterranean cavern of material life, elevate her to ethereal splendors,
and place her in the islands of the blessed.

From this account of the human soul, that most important Platonic dogma
necessarily follows, that our soul essentially contains all knowledge,
and that whatever knowledge she acquires in the present life, is in
reality nothing more than a recovery of what a he once possessed. This
recovery is very properly called by Plato reminiscence, not as being
attended with actual recollection in the present life, but as being an
actual repossession of what the soul had lost through her oblivious union
with the body. Alluding to this essential knowledge of the soul, which
discipline evocates from its dormant retreats, Plato says in the
Sophista, "that we know all things as in a dream, and are again ignorant
of them, according to vigilant perception." Hence too, as Proclus well
observes, it is evident that the soul does not collect her knowledge from
sensibles, nor from things partial and divisible discover the whole and
the one. For it is not proper to think that things which have in no
respect a real subsistence, should be the leading causes of knowledge to
the soul; and that things which oppose each other and are ambiguous,
should precede science which has a sameness of subsistence; nor that
things which are variously mutable, should be generative of reasons which
are established in unity; nor that things indefinite should be the causes
of definite intelligence. It is not fit, therefore, that the truth of
things eternal should be received from the many, nor the discrimination
of universals from sensibles, nor a judgment respecting what is good from
irrational natures; but it is requisite that the soul entering within
herself, should investigate herself the true and the good, and the
eternal reasons of things.

We have said that discipline awakens the dormant knowledge of
the soul; and Plato considered this as particularly effected by the
mathematical discipline. Hence, he asserts of theoretic arithmetic that
it imparts no small aid to our ascent to real being, and that it
liberates us from the wandering and ignorance about a sensible nature.
Geometry too is considered by him as most instrumental to the knowledge
of the good, when it is not pursued for the sake of practical purposes,
but as the means of ascent to an intelligible essence. Astronomy also is
useful for the purpose of investigating the fabricator of all things,
and contemplating as in most splendid images the ideal world, and its
ineffable cause. And lastly music, when properly studied, is subservient
to our ascent, viz. when from sensible we betake ourselves to the
contemplation of ideal and divine harmony. Unless, however, we thus
employ the mathematical discipline, the study of them is justly
considered by Plato as imperfect and useless, and of no worth. For as
the true end of man according to his philosophy is an assimilation to
divinity, in the greatest perfection of which human nature is capable,
whatever contributes to this is to be ardently pursued; but whatever has
a different tendency, however necessary it may be to the wants and
conveniences of the mere animal life, is comparatively little and vile.
Hence it necessary to pass rapidly from things visible and audible, to
those which are alone seen by the eye of intellect. For the mathematical
sciences, when properly studied, move the inherent knowledge of the soul;
awaken its intelligence; purify its dianoetic power; call forth its
essential forms from their dormant retreats; remove that oblivion and
ignorance which are congenial with our birth; and dissolve the bonds
arising from our union with an irrational nature. It is therefore
beautifully said by Plato in the 7th book of his Republic, "that the soul
through these disciplines has an organ purified and enlightened, which is
blinded and buried by studies of a different kind, an organ better worth
saving than ten thousand eyes, since truth becomes visible through this
alone."

Dialectic, however, or the vertex of the mathematical sciences,
as it is called by Plato in his Republic, is that master discipline which
particularly leads us up to an intelligible essence. Of this first of
sciences, which is essentially different from vulgar logic, and is the
same with what Aristotle calls the first philosophy and wisdom, I have
largely spoken in the introduction and notes to the Parmenides. Suffice
it therefore to observe in this place, that dialectic differs from
mathematical science in this, that the latter flows from, and the former
is void of hypothesis. That dialectic has a power of knowing universals;
that it ascends to good and the supreme cause of all; and, that it
considers good as the end of its elevation; but that the mathematical
science, which previously fabricates for itself definite principles, from
which it evinces things consequent to such principles, does not tend to
the principle, but to the conclusion. Hence Plato does not expel
mathematical knowledge from the number of the sciences, but asserts it to
be the next in rank to that one science which is the summit of all; nor
does he accuse it as ignorant of its own principles, but considers it as
receiving these from the master science dialectic, and that possessing
them without any demonstration, it demonstrates from these its consequent
propositions.

Hence Socrates, in the Republic, speaking of the power of dialectic,
says that it surrounds all disciplines like a defensive enclosure, and
elevates those that use it to the good itself, and the first unities;
that it purifies the eye of the soul; establishes itself in true beings,
and, the one principle of all things, and ends at last in that which is
no longer hypothetical. The power of dialectic, therefore, being thus
great, and the ends of this path so mighty, it must by no means be
confounded with arguments which are alone conversant with opinion: for
the former is the guardian of sciences, and the passage to it is through
these, but the latter is perfectly destitute of disciplinative science.
To which we may add, that the method of reasoning which is founded in
opinion, regards only that which is apparent; but the dialectic method
endeavors to arrive at the one itself, always employing for this purpose
steps of ascent, and at last beautifully ends in the nature of the good.
Very different therefore is it from the merely logical method, which
presides over the demonstrative phantasy, is of a secondary nature, and
is alone pleased with contentious discussions. For the dialectic of Plato
for the most part employs divisions and analyses as primary sciences, and
as imitating the progression of beings from the one, and their conversion
to it again. It likewise sometimes uses definitions and demonstrations,
and prior to these the definitive method, and the divisive prior to this.
On the contrary, the merely logical method, which is solely conversant
with opinion, is deprived of the incontrovertible reasonings of
demonstration.

The following is a specimen of the analytical method of Plato's dialectic.
Of analysis there are three species. For one is an ascent from sensibles
to the first intelligibles; a second is an ascent through things
demonstrated and subdemonstrated, to undemonstrated and immediate
propositions; and a third proceeds from hypothesis to unhypothetical
principles. Of the first of these species, Plato has given a most
admirable specimen in the speech of Diotima in the Banquet. For there he
ascends from the beauty about bodies to the beauty in souls; from this to
the beauty in right disciplines; from this again to the beauty in laws;
from the beauty in laws to the ample sea of beauty (Greek: to polu pelagos
tou kalou); and thus proceeding he at length arrives at the beautiful
itself.

The second species of analysis is as follows: It is necessary to make the
thing investigated the subject of hypothesis; to survey such things as
are prior to it; and to demonstrate these from things posterior,
ascending to such as are prior, till we arrive at the first thing and to
which we give our assent. But beginning from this, we descend
synthetically to the thing investigated. Of this species, the following
is an example from the Phaedrus of Plato. It is inquired if the soul is
immortal; and this being hypothetically admitted, it is inquired in the
next place if it is always moved. This being demonstrated, the next
inquiry is if that which is always moved, is self-moved; and this again
being demonstrated, it is considered whether that which is self-moved is
the principle of motion, and afterwards if the principle is unbegotten.
This then being admitted as a thing acknowledged, and likewise that what
is begotten is incorruptible, the demonstration of the thing proposed is
thus collected. If there is a principle, it is unbegotten and
incorruptible. That which is self-moved is the principle of motion. Soul
is self-moved. Soul therefore (i.e. the rational soul) is incorruptible,
unbegotten, and immortal.

Of the third species of analysis, which proceeds from the hypothetical to
that which is unhypothetical, Plato has given a most beautiful specimen
in the first hypothesis of his Parmenides. For here, taking for his
hypothesis that the one is, he proceeds through an orderly series of
negations, which are not privative of their subjects, but generative of
things which are as it were, their opposites, till he at length takes
away the hypothesis that the one is. For he denies of it all discourse
and every appellation. And thus evidently denies of it not only that it
is, but even negation. For all things are posterior to the one; viz.
things known, knowledge, and the instruments of knowledge. And thus,
beginning from the hypothetical, he ends in that which is unhypothetical,
and truly ineffable.

Having taken a general survey, both of the great world and the microcosm
man, I shall close this account of the principal dogmas of Plato, with
the outlines of his doctrine concerning Providence and Fate, as it is a
subject of the greatest importance, and the difficulties in which it is
involved are happily removed by that prince of philosophers.

In the first place, therefore, Providence, according to common
conceptions, is the cause of good to the subjects of its care; and Fate
is the cause of a certain connection to generated natures. This being
admitted, let us consider what the things are which are connected. Of
beings, therefore, some have their essence in eternity, and others in
time. But by beings whose essence is in eternity, I mean those whose
energy as well as their essence is eternal; and by beings essentially
temporal, those whose essence is always in generation, or becoming to be,
though this should take place in an infinite time. The media between
these two extremes are natures which, in a certain respect, have an
essence permanent and better than generation, or a flowing subsistence,
but whose energy is measured by time. For it is necessary that every
procession from things first to last should be effected through media.
The medium, therefore, between these two extremes, must either be that
which has an eternal essence, but any energy indigent of time, or, on the
contrary, that which has a temporal essence, but an eternal energy. It is
impossible, however, for the latter of these to have any subsistence; for
if this were admitted, energy would be prior to essence. The medium,
therefore, must be that whose essence is eternal, but energy temporal.
And the three orders which compose this first middle and last are, the
intellectual, psychical (or that pertaining to soul), and corporeal. For
from what has been already said by us concerning the gradation of beings,
it is evident that the intellectual order is established in eternity,
both in essence and energy; that the corporeal order is always in
generation, or advancing to being, and this either in an infinite time,
or in a part of time; and that the psychical is indeed eternal in
essence, but temporal in energy. Where then shall we rank things which
being distributed either in places or times, have a certain coordination
and sympathy with each other through connection? It is evident that they
must be ranked among altermotive and corporeal natures. For of things
which subsist beyond the order of bodies, some are better both than place
and time; and others, though they energize according to time, appear to
be entirely pure from any connection with place.

Hence things which are governed and connected by Fate are entirely
altermotive and corporeal. If this then is demonstrated, it is manifest
that admitting Fate to be a cause of connection, we must assert that it
presides over altermotive and corporeal natures. If, therefore, we look
to that which is the proximate cause of bodies, and thorough which also
altermotive beings are moved, breathe, and are held together, we shall
find that this is nature, the energies of which are to generate, nourish,
and increase. If, therefore, this power not only subsists in us, and all
other animals and plants, but prior to partial bodies there is, by a much
greater necessity, one nature of the world which comprehends and is
motive of all bodies; it follows that nature must be the cause of things
connected, and that in this we must investigate Fate. Hence, Fate is
nature, or that incorporeal power which is the one life of the world,
presiding over bodies, moving all things according to time, and
connecting the motions of things that, by places and times, are distant
from each other. It is likewise the cause of the mutual sympathy of
mortal natures, and of their conjunction with such as are eternal. For
the nature which is in us, binds and connects all the parts of our body,
of which also it is a certain Fate. And as in our body some parts have a
principal subsistence, and others are less principal, and the latter are
consequent to the former, so in the universe, the generations of the less
principal parts are consequent to the motions of the more principal, viz.
the sublunary generations to the periods of the celestial bodies; and the
circle of the former is the image of the latter.

Hence it is not difficult to see that Providence is deity itself, the
fountain of all good. For whence can good be imparted, to all things, but
from divinity? So that no other cause of good but deity is, as Plato
says, to be assigned. And, in the next place, as this cause is superior
to all intelligible and sensible natures, it is consequently superior to
Fate. Whatever too is subject to Fate, is also under the dominion of
Providence; having its connection indeed from Fate, but deriving the good
which it possesses from Providence. But again, not all things that are
under the dominion of Providence are indigent of Fate; for intelligibles
are exempt from its sway. Fate therefore is profoundly conversant with
corporeal natures; since connection introduces time and corporeal motion.
Hence Plato, looking to this, says in the Timaeus, that the world is
mingled from intellect and necessity, the former ruling over the latter.
For by necessity here he means the motive cause of bodies, which in other
places he calls Fate. And this with great propriety; since every body is
compelled to do whatever it does, and to suffer whatever it suffers; to
heat or to be heated, to impart or to receive cold. But the elective
power is unknown to a corporeal nature; so that the necessary and the
nonelective may be said to be the peculiarities of bodies.

As there are two genera of things, therefore, the intelligible and the
sensible, so likewise there are two kingdoms of these; that of
Providence, upwards, which reigns over intelligibles and sensibles, and
that of Fate downwards, which reigns over sensibles only. Providence
likewise differs from Fate in the same manner as deity from that which is
divine indeed, but participation, and not primarily. For in other things
we see that which has a primary subsistence, and that which subsists
according to participation. Thus the light which subsists in the orb of
the sun is primary light, and that which is in the air, according to
participation; the latter being derived from the former. And life is
primarily in the soul, but secondarily in the body. Thus also, according
to Plato, Providence is deity, but Fate is something divine, and not a
god: for it depends upon Providence, of which it is as it were the image.
As Providence too is to intelligibles, so is Fate to sensibles. And,
alternately, as Providence is to Fate, so are intelligibles to sensibles.
But intelligibles are the first of beings, and from these others derive
their subsistence. And hence the order of Fate depends on the dominion of
Providence.

In the second place, let us look to the rational nature itself, when
correcting the inaccuracy of sensible information, as when it accuses the
sight of deception, in seeing the orb of the sun as not larger than a
foot in diameter; when it represses the ebullitions of anger, and
exclaims with Ulysses,

  "Endure my heart;"

or when it restrains the wanton tendencies of desire to corporeal delight.
For in all such operations it manifestly subdues the irrational motions,
both gnostic and appetitive, and absolves itself from them, as from
things foreign to its nature. But it is necessary to investigate the
essence of every thing, not from its perversion, but from its energies
according to nature. If therefore reason, when it energizes in us as
reason, restrains the shadowy impressions of the delights of licentious
desire, punishes the precipitate motion of fury, and reproves the senses
as full of deception, asserting that

  "We nothing accurate, or see, or hear:"

and if it says this, looking to its internal reasons, none of which it
knows through the body, or through corporeal cognitions, it is evident
that, according to this energy, it removes itself far from the senses,
contrary to the decision of which it becomes separated from those sorrows
and delights.

After this, let us direct our attention to another and a better motion of
our rational soul, when, during the tranquillity of the inferior parts,
by a self-convertive energy, it sees its own essence, the powers which it
contains, the harmonic reasons from which it consists, and the many lives
of which it is the middle boundary, and thus finds itself to be a
rational world, the image of the prior natures, from which it proceeds,
but the paradigm of such as are posterior to itself. To this energy of
the soul, theoretic arithmetic and geometry greatly contribute, for these
remove it from the senses, purify the intellect from the irrational forms
of life with which it is surrounded, and lead it to the incorporeal
perception of ideas. For if these sciences receive the soul replete with
images, and knowing nothing subtile and unattended with material
garrulity; and if they elucidate reasons possessing an irrefragable
necessity of demonstration, and forms full of all certainty and
immateriality, and which by no means call to their aid the inaccuracy of
sensibles, do they not evidently purify our intellectual life from things
which fill us with a privation of intellect, and which impede our
perception of true being?

After both these operations of the rational soul, let us now survey her
highest intelligence, through which she sees her sister souls in the
universe, who are allotted a residence in the heavens, and in the whole
of a visible nature, according to the will of the fabricator of the
world. But above all souls, she sees intellectual essences and orders.
For a deiform intellect resides above every soul, and which also imparts
to the soul an intellectual habit. Prior to these, however, she sees
those divine monads, from which all intellectual multitudes receive their
unions. For above all things united, there must necessarily be unific
causes; above things vivified, vivifying causes; above intellectual
natures, those that impart intellect; and above all participants,
imparticipable natures. From all these elevating modes of intelligence,
it must be obvious to such as are not perfectly blind, how the soul,
leaving sense and body behind, surveys through the projecting energies of
intellect those beings that are entirely exempt from all connection with
a corporeal nature.

The rational and intellectual soul therefore, in whatever manner it may
be moved according to nature, is beyond body and sense. And hence it must
necessarily have an essence separate from both. But from this again, it
becomes manifest, that when it energizes according to its nature, it is
superior to Fate, and beyond the reach of its attractive power; but that,
when falling into sense and things irrational and corporalized, it
follows downward natures and lives, with them as with inebriated
neighbors, then together with them it becomes subject to the dominion of
Fate. For again, it is necessary that there should be an order of beings
of such a kind, as to subsist according to essence above Fate, but to be
sometimes ranked under it according to habitude. For if there are beings,
and such are all intellectual natures which are eternally established
above the laws of Fate, and also which, according to the whole of their
life, are distributed under the periods of Fate, it is necessary that the
medium between these should be that nature which is sometimes above, and
sometimes under the dominion of Fate. For the procession of incorporeal
natures is much more without a vacuum than that of bodies.

The free will therefore of man, according to Plato, is a rational
elective, power, desiderative of true and apparent good, and leading the
soul to both, through which it ascends and descends, errs and acts with
rectitude. And hence the elective will be the same with that which
characterizes our essence. According to this power, we differ from divine
and mortal natures: for each of these is void of that two-fold inclination;
the one on account of its excellence being alone established in true
good; but the other in apparent good, on account of its defect. Intellect
too characterizes the one, but sense the other; and the former, as
Plotinus says, is our king, but the latter our messenger. We therefore
are established in the elective power as a medium; and having the ability
of tending both to true and apparent good, when we tend to the former we
follow the guidance of intellect, when to the latter, that of sense. The
power therefore which is in us is not capable of all things. For the
power which is omnipotent is characterized by unity; and on this account
is all-powerful, because it is one, and possesses the form of good. But
the elective power is two-fold, and on this account is not able to effect
all things; because, by it's inclinations to true and apparent good, it
falls short of that nature which is prior to all things. It would however
be all-powerful, if it had not an elective impulse, and was will alone.
For a life subsisting according to will alone subsists according to good,
because the will naturally tends to good, and such a life makes that
which is characteristic in us most powerful and deiform. And hence
through this the soul, according to Plato, becomes divine, and in another
life, in conjunction with deity, governs the world. And thus much of the
outlines of the leading dogmas of the philosophy of Plato.

In the beginning of this Introduction, I observed that, in drawing these
outlines I should conduct the reader through novel and solitary paths,
solitary indeed they must be, since they have been unfrequented from the
reign of the emperor Justinian to the present time; and novel they will
doubtless appear to readers of every description, and particularly to
those who have been nursed as it were in the bosom of matter, the pupils
of experiment, the darlings of sense, and the legitimate descendants of
the earth-born race that warred on the Olympian gods. To such as these,
who have gazed on the dark and deformed face of their nurse, till they
are incapable of beholding the light of truth, and who are become so
drowsy from drinking immoderately of the cup of oblivion, that their
whole life is nothing more than a transmigration from sleep to sleep, and
from dream to dream, like men passing from one bed to another,--to such
as these, the road through which we have been traveling will appear to be
a delusive passage, and the objects which we have surveyed to be nothing
more than fantastic visions, seen only by the eye of imagination, and
when seen, idle and vain as the dreams of a shadow.

The following arguments, however, may perhaps awaken some few of these
who are less lethargic than the rest, from the sleep of sense, and enable
them to elevate their mental eye from the dark mire in which they are
plunged, and gain a glimpse of this most weighty truth, that there is
another world, of which this is nothing more than a most obscure
resemblance, and another life, of which this is but the flying mockery.
My present discourse therefore is addressed to those who consider
experiment as the only solid criterion of truth. In the first place then,
these men appear to be ignorant of the invariable laws of demonstration
properly so called, and that the necessary requisites of all
demonstrative propositions are these: that they exist as causes, are
primary, more excellent, peculiar, true, and known than the conclusions.
For every demonstration not only consists of principles prior to others,
but of such as are eminently first; since if the assumed propositions may
be demonstrated by other assumptions, such propositions may indeed
appear prior to the conclusions, but are by no means entitled to the
appellation of first. Others, on the contrary, which require no
demonstration, but are of themselves manifest, are deservedly esteemed
the first, the truest, and the best. Such indemonstrable truths were
called by the ancients axioms from their majesty and authority, as the
assumptions which constitute demonstrative syllogisms derive all their
force and efficacy from these.

In the next place, they seem not to be sufficiently aware, that universal
is better than partial demonstration. For that demonstration is the more
excellent which is derived from the better cause; but a universal is more
extended and excellent than a partial cause; since the arduous
investigation of the why in any subject is only stopped by the arrival at
universals. Thus if we desire to know why the outward angles of a
triangle are equal to four right angles, and it is answered, Because the
triangle is isosceles; we again ask, but why Because isosceles? And if it
be replied, Because it is a triangle; we may again inquire, But why
because a triangle? To which we finally answer, because a triangle is a
right-lined figure. And here our inquiry rests at that universal idea,
which embraces every preceding particular one, and is contained in no
other more general and comprehensive than itself. Add too, that the
demonstration of particulars is almost the demonstration of infinites; of
universals the demonstration of finites; and of infinites there can be no
science. That demonstration likewise is the best which furnishes the mind
with the most ample knowledge; and this is, alone, the province of
universals. We may also add, that he who knows universals knows
particulars likewise in capacity; but we can not infer that he who has
the best knowledge of particulars, knows any thing of universals. And
lastly, that which is universal is the object of intellect and reason;
but particulars are coordinated to the perceptions of sense.

But here perhaps the experimentalist will say, admitting all this to be
true, yet we no otherwise obtain a perception of these universals than by
an induction of particulars, and abstraction from sensibles. To this, I
answer that the universal which is the proper object of science, is not
by any means the offspring of abstraction; and induction is no otherwise
subservient to its existence than an exciting cause. For if scientific
conclusions are indubitable, if the truth of demonstration is necessary
and eternal, this universal is truly all, and not like that gained by
abstraction, limited to a certain number of particulars. Thus, the
proposition that the angles of every triangle are equal to two right, if
it is indubitably true, that is, if the term every in it really includes
all triangles, cannot be the result of any abstraction; for this, however
extended it may be, is limited, and falls far short of universal
comprehension. Whence is it then that the dianoetic power concludes thus
confidently that the Proposition is true of all triangles? For if it be
said that the mind, after having abstracted triangle from a certain
number of particulars, adds from itself what is wanting to complete the
all; in the first place, no man, I believe, will say that any such
operation as this took place in his mind when he first learnt this
proposition; and in the next place, if this should be granted, it would
follow that such proposition is a mere fiction, since it is uncertain
whether that which is added to complete the all is truly added; and thus
the conclusion will no longer be indubitably necessary.

In short, if the words all and every, with which every page of theoretic
mathematics is full, mean what they are conceived by all men to mean, and
if the universals which they signify are the proper objects of science,
such universals must subsist in the soul prior to the energies of sense.
Hence it will follow that induction is no otherwise subservient to
science, than as it produces credibility in axioms and petitions; and
this by exciting the universal conception of these latent in the soul.
The particulars, therefore, of which an induction is made in order to
produce science, must be so simple, that they may be immediately
apprehended, and that the universal may be predicated of them without
hesitation. The particulars of the experimentalists are not of this kind,
and therefore never can be sources of science truly so called.

Of this, however, the man of experiment appears to be totally ignorant,
and in consequence of this, he is likewise ignorant that parts can only
be truly known through wholes, and that this is particularly the case
with parts when they belong to a whole, which, as we have already
observed, from comprehending in itself the parts which it produces, is
called a whole prior to parts. As he, therefore, would by no means merit
the appellation of a physician who should attempt to cure any part of the
human body, without a previous knowledge of the whole; so neither can he
know any thing truly of the vegetable life of plants, who has not a
previous knowledge of that vegetable life which subsists in the earth as
a whole prior to, because the principle and cause of all partial
vegetable life, and who still prior to this has not a knowledge of that
greater whole of this kind which subsists in nature herself; nor, as
Hippocrates justly observes, can he know any thing truly of the nature of
the human body who is ignorant what nature is considered as a great
comprehending whole. And if this be true, and it is so most indubitably,
with all physiological inquiries, how much more must it be the case with
respect to a knowledge of those incorporeal forms to which we ascended in
the first part of this Introduction, and which in consequence of
proceeding from wholes entirely exempt from body are participated by it,
with much greater obscurity and imperfection? Here then is the great
difference, and a mighty one it is, between the knowledge gained by the
most elaborate experiments, and that acquired by scientific reasoning,
founded on the spontaneous, unperverted, and self-luminous conceptions of
the soul. The former does not even lead its votary up to that one nature
of the earth from which the natures of all the animals and plants on its
surface, and of all the minerals and metals in its interior parts,
blossom as from a perennial root. The latter conducts its votary through
all the several mundane wholes up to that great whole the world itself,
and thence leads him through the luminous order of incorporeal wholes to
that vast whole of wholes, in which all other wholes are centred and
rooted, and which is no other than the principle of all principles, and
the fountain of deity itself. No less remarkable likewise, is the
difference between the tendencies of the two pursuits, for the one
elevates the soul to the most luminous heights, and to that great
ineffable which is beyond all altitude; but the other is the cause of a
mighty calamity to the soul, since, according to the elegant expression
of Plutarch, it extinguishes her principal and brightest eye, the
knowledge of divinity. In short, the one leads to all that is grand,
sublime and splendid in the universe; the other to all that is little,
groveling[14] and dark. The one is the parent of the most pure and ardent
piety; the genuine progeny of the other are impiety and atheism. And, in
fine, the one confers on its votary the most sincere, permanent, and
exalted delight; the other continual disappointment, and unceasing
molestation.

-----------------
[14] That this must be the tendency of experiment, when prosecuted as the
criterion of truth, is evident from what Bacon, the prince of modern
philosophy, says in the 104th Aphorism of his Novum Organum, that
"baseless fabric of a vision." For he there sagely observes that wings
are not to be added to the human intellect, but rather lead and weights;
that all its leaps and flights may be restrained. That this is not yet
done, but that when it is we may entertain better hopes respecting the
sciences. "Itaque hominum intellectui non plumae addendae, sed plumbum
potius, et pondera; ut cohibeant omnem saltum et volatum. Atque hoc adhuc
factum non est; quum vero factum fuerit, melius de scientiis sperare
licebit." A considerable portion of lead must certainly have been added
to the intellect of Bacon when he wrote this Aphorism.
-----------------

If such then are the consequences, such the tendencies of experimental
inquiries, when prosecuted as the criterion of truth, and daily
experience[15] unhappily shows that they are, there can be no other remedy
for this enormous evil than the intellectual philosophy of Plato. So
obviously excellent indeed is the tendency of this philosophy, that its
author, for a period of more than two thousand years, has been universally
celebrated by the epithet of divine. Such too is its preeminence, that it
may be shown, without much difficulty, that the greatest men of antiquity,
from the time in which its salutary light first blessed the human race,
have been more or less imbued with its sacred principles, have been more or
less the votaries of its divine truths. Thus, to mention a few from among a
countless multitude. In the catalogue of those endued with sovereign power,
it had for its votaries Dion of Siracusian, Julian the Roman, and Chosroes
the Persian, emperor; among the leaders of armies, it had Chabrias and
Phocion, those brave generals of the Athenians; among mathematicians, those
leading stars of science, Eudoxus, Archimedes[16] and Euclid; among
biographers, the inimitable Plutarch; among physicians, the admirable
Galen; among rhetoricians, those unrivaled orators Demosthenes and Cicero;
among critics, that prince of philologists, Longinus; and among poets, the
most learned and majestic Virgil. Instances, though not equally illustrious,
yet approximating to these in splendour, may doubtless be adduced after
the fall of the Roman empire; but then they have been formed on these
great ancients as models, and are, consequently, only rivulets from
Platonic streams. And instances of excellence in philosophic attainments,
similar to those among the Greeks, might have been enumerated among the
moderns, if the hand of barbaric despotism had not compelled philosophy
to retire into the deepest solitude, by demolishing her schools, and
involving the human intellect in Cimmerian darkness. In our own country,
however, though no one appears to have wholly devoted himself to the
study of this philosophy, and he who does not will never penetrate its
depths, yet we have a few bright examples of no common proficiency in its
more accessible parts.

-----------------
[15] I never yet knew a man who made experiment the test of truth, and I
have known many such, that was not atheistically inclined.

[16] I have ranked Archimedes among the Platonists, because he cultivated
the mathematical sciences Platonically, as is evident from the testimony of
Plutarch in his Life of Marcellus, p. 307. For he there informs us that
Archimedes considered the being busied about mechanics, and in short, every
art which is connected with the common purposes of life, as ignoble and
illiberal; and that those things alone were objects of his ambition with
which the beautiful and the excellent were present, unmingled with the
necessary. The great accuracy and elegance in the demonstrations of Euclid
and Archimedes, which have not been equaled by any of our greatest modern
mathematicians, were derived from a deep conviction of this important
truth. On the other hand modern mathematicians, through a profound
ignorance of this divine truth, and looking to nothing but the wants and
conveniences of the animal life of man, as if the gratification of his
senses was his only end, have corrupted pure geometry, by mingling with it
algebraical calculations, and through eagerness to reduce it as much as
possible to practical purposes, have more anxiously sought after
conciseness than accuracy, facility than elegance of geometrical
demonstration.
-----------------

The instances I allude to are Shaftesbury, Akenside, Harris, Petwin, and
Sydenham. So splendid is the specimen of philosophic abilities displayed by
these writers, like the fair dawning of same unclouded morning, that we
have only deeply to regret that the sun of their genius sat before we were
gladdened with its effulgence. Had it shone with its full strength, the
writer of this Introduction would not have attempted either to translate
the works, or elucidate the doctrines of Plato; but though it rose with
vigor, it dispersed not the clouds in which its light was gradually
involved, and the eye in vain anxiously waited for it's meridian beam.
In short, the principles of the philosophy of Plato are of all others the
most friendly to true piety, pure morality, solid learning, and sound
government. For as it is scientific in all its parts, and in these parts
comprehends all that can be known by man in theology and ethics, and all
that is necessary for him to know in physics, it must consequently contain
in itself the source of all that is great and good both to individuals and
communities, must necessarily exalt while it benefits, and deify while it
exalts.

We have said that this philosophy at first shone forth through Plato with
an occult and venerable splendor; and it is owing to the hidden manner in
which it is delivered by him, that its depth was not fathomed till many
ages after it's promulgation, and when fathomed, was treated by
superficial readers with ridicule and contempt. Plato indeed, is not
singular in delivering his philosophy occultly: for this was the custom
of all the great ancients; a custom not originating from a wish to become
tyrants in knowledge, and keep the multitude in ignorance, but from a
profound conviction that the sublimest truths are profaned when clearly
unfolded to the vulgar. This indeed must necessarily follow; since, as
Socrates in Plato justly observes, "it is not lawful for the pure to be
touched by the impure;" and the multitude are neither purified from the
defilements of vice, nor the darkness of twofold ignorance. Hence, while
they are thus doubly impure, it is as impossible for them to perceive the
splendors of truth, as for an eye buried in mire to survey the light
of day.

The depth of this philosophy then does not appear to have been perfectly
penetrated except by the immediate disciples of Plato, for more than five
hundred years after its first propagation. For though Crantor, Atticus,
Albinus, Galen and Plutarch, were men of great genius, and made no common
proficiency in Philosophic attainments, yet they appear not to have
developed the profundity of Plato's conceptions; they withdrew not the
veil which covers his secret meaning, like the curtains which guarded the
adytum of temples from the profane eye; and they saw not that all behind
the veil is luminous, and that there divine spectacles[17] every where
present themselves to the view. This task was reserved for men who were
born indeed in a baser age, but, who being allotted a nature similar to
their leader, were the true interpreters of his mystic speculations. The
most conspicuous of these are the great Plotinus, the most learned
Porphyry, the divine Jamblichus, the most acute Syrianus, Proclus the
consummation of philosophic excellence, the magnificent Hierocles, the
concisely elegant Sallust, and the most inquisitive Damascius. By these
men, who were truly links of the golden chain of deity, all that is
sublime, all that is mystic in the doctrines of Plato (and they are
replete with both these in a transcendent degree), was freed from its
obscurity and unfolded into the most pleasing and admirable light. Their
labors, however, have been ungratefully received. The beautiful light
which they benevolently disclosed has hitherto unnoticed illumined
philosophy in her desolate retreats, like a lamp shining on some
venerable statue amidst dark and solitary ruins. The prediction of the
master has been unhappily fulfilled in these his most excellent
disciples. "For an attempt of this kind," says he,[18] "will only be
beneficial to a few, who from small vestiges, previously demonstrated,
are themselves able to discover these abstruse particulars. But with
respect to the rest of mankind, some it will fill with a contempt by no
means elegant, and others with a lofty and arrogant hope, that they shall
now learn certain excellent things." Thus with respect to these admirable
men, the last and the most legitimate of the followers of Plato, some
from being entirely ignorant of the abstruse dogmas of Plato, and finding
these interpreters full of conceptions which are by no means obvious to
every one in the writings of that philosopher, have immediately concluded
that such conceptions are mere jargon and revery, that they are not truly
Platonic, and that they are nothing more than streams, which, though,
originally derived from a pure fountain, have become polluted by distance
from their source. Others, who pay attention to nothing but the most
exquisite purity of language, look down with contempt upon every writer
who lived after the fall of the Macedonian empire; as if dignity and
weight of sentiment were inseparable from splendid and accurate diction;
or as if it were impossible for elegant writers to exist in a degenerate
age. So far is this from being the case, that though the style of
Plotinus[19] and Jamblichus[20] is by no means to be compared with that
of Plato, yet this inferiority is lost in the depth and sublimity of
their conceptions, and is as little regarded by the intelligent reader,
as motes in a sunbeam by the eye that gladly turns itself to the
solar light.

--------------
[17] See my Dissertation on the Mysteries.

[18]See the 7th Epistle of Plato.

[19] It would seem that those intemperate critics who have thought proper
to revile Plotinus, the leader of the latter Platonists, have paid no
attention to the testimony of Longinus concerning this most wonderful
man, as preserved by Porphyry in his life of him. For Longinus there
says, "that though he does not entirely accede to many of his hypotheses,
yet he exceedingly admires and loves the form of his writing, the density
of his conceptions, and the philosophic manner in which his questions are
disposed." And in another place he says, "Plotinus, as it seems, has
explained the Pythagoric and Platonic principles more clearly than those
that were prior to him; for neither are the writings of Numenius,
Cronius, Moderatus, and Thrasyllus, to be compared with those of Plotinus
on this subject." After such a testimony as this from such a consummate
critic as Longinus, the writings of Plotinus have nothing to fear from
the imbecile censure of modern critics. I shall only further observe,
that Longinus, in the above testimony, does not give the least hint of
his having found any polluted streams, or corruption of the doctrines of
Plato, in the works of Plotinus. There is not indeed the least vestige of
his entertaining any such opinion in any part of what he has said about
this most extraordinary man. This discovery was reserved for the more
acute critic of modern times, who, by a happiness of conjecture unknown
to the ancients, and the assistance of a good index, can in a few days
penetrate the meaning of the profoundest writer of antiquity, and bid
defiance even to the decision of Longinus.

[20] Of this most divine man, who is justly said by the emperor Julian to
have been posterior indeed in time, but not in genius even to Plato himself,
see the life which I have given in the History of the Restoration of the
Platonic Theology, in the second vol. of my Proclus on Euclid.
----------------------

As to the style of Porphyry, when we consider that he was the disciple of
Longinus, whom Eunapius elegantly calls "a certain living library, and
walking museum," it is but reasonable to suppose that he imbibed some
portion of his master's excellence in writing. That he did so is
abundantly evident from the testimony of Eunapius, who particularly
commends his style for its clearness, purity, and grace. "Hence," he
says, "Porphyry being let down to men like a mercurial chain, through his
various erudition, unfolded every thing into perspicuity, and purity."
And in another place he speaks of him as abounding with all the graces of
diction, and as the only one that exhibited and proclaimed the praise of
his master. With respect to the style of Proclus, it is pure, clear and
elegant, like that of Dionysius Halicarnassus; but is much more copious
and magnificent; that of Hierocles is venerable and majestic, and nearly
equals the style of the greatest ancients; that of Sallust possesses an
accuracy and a pregnant brevity, which cannot easily be distinguished
from the composition of the Stagirite; and lastly, that of Damascius is
clear and accurate, and highly worthy a most investigating mind.

Others again have filled themselves with a vain confidence, from reading
of commentaries of these admirable interpreters, and have in a short time
considered themselves superior to their masters. This was the case with
Ficinus, Picus, Dr. Henry Moore, and other pseudo Platonists, their
contemporaries, who, in order to combine Christianity with the doctrines
of Plato, rejected some of his most important tenets, and perverted
others, and thus corrupted one of these systems, and afforded no real
benefit to the other.

But who are the men by whom these latter interpreters of Plato are
reviled? When and whence did this defamation originate? Was it when the
fierce champions for the trinity fled from Galilee to the groves of
Academus, and invoked, but in vain, the assistance of Philosophy? When

  The trembling grove confessed its fright,
  The wood-nymphs started at the sight;
  Ilissus backward urg'd his course,
  And rush'd indignant to his source.

Was it because that mitred sophist, Warburton, thought fit to talk of the
polluted streams of the Alexandrian school, without knowing any thing of
the source whence those streams are derived? Or was it because some heavy
German critic, who knew nothing beyond a verb in mi, presumed to grunt at
these venerable heroes? Whatever was its source, and whenever it
originated, for I have not been able to discover either, this however is
certain, that it owes its being to the most profound Ignorance, or the
most artful Sophistry, and that its origin is no less contemptible than
obscure. For let us but for a moment consider the advantages which these
latter Platonists possessed beyond any of their modern revilers. In the
first place, they had the felicity of having the Greek for their native
language, and must therefore, as they were confessedly, learned men, have
understood that language incomparably better than any man since the time
in which the ancient Greek was a living tongue. In the next place, they
had books to consult, written by the immediate disciples of Plato, which
have been lost for upwards of a thousand years, besides many Pythagoric
writings from which Plato himself derived most of his more sublime
dogmas. Hence we find the works of Parmenides, Empedocles, the Electic
Zeno, Speusippus, Xenocrates, and many other illustrious philosophers of
the highest antiquity, who were either genuine Platonists or the sources
of Platonism, are continually cited by these most excellent interpreters,
and in the third place they united the greatest purity of life to the
most piercing vigor of intellect. Now when it is considered that the
philosophy to the study of which these great men devoted their lives, was
professedly delivered by its author in obscurity; that Aristotle himself
studied it for twenty years; and that it was no uncommon thing, as Plato
informs us in one of his Epistles, to find students unable to comprehend
its sublimest tenets even in a longer period than this,--when all these
circumstances are considered, what must we think of the arrogance, not to
say impudence, of men in the seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth
centuries, who have dared to calumniate these great masters of wisdom? Of
men, with whom the Greek is no native language; who have no such books to
consult as those had whom they revile; who have never thought, even in a
dream, of making the acquisition of wisdom the great object of their
life; and who in short have committed that most baneful error of
mistaking philology for philosophy, and words for things? When such as
these dare to defame men who may be justly ranked among the greatest and
wisest of the ancients, what else can be said than that they are the
legitimate descendants of the suitors of Penelope, whom, in the animated
language of Ulysses,

  Laws or divine or human fail'd to move,
  Or shame of men, or dread of gods above:
  Heedless alike of infamy or praise,
  Or Fame's eternal voice in future days,[21]

-----------------
[21] Pope's Odyssey, book xxii, v. 47, &c.
-----------------

But it is now time to present the reader with a general view of the works
of Plato, and, also to speak of the preambles, digressions, and style of
their author, and of the following translation. In accomplishing the
first of these, I shall avail myself of the synopsis of Mr. Sydenham,
taking the liberty at the same time of correcting it where it appears to
be erroneous, and of making additions to it where it appears to be
deficient.

The dialogues of Plato are of various kinds; not only with regard to
those different matters, which are the subjects of them; but in respect
of the manner also in which they are composed or framed, and of the form
under which they make their appearance to the reader. It will therefore,
as I imagine, be not improper, in pursuance of the admonition given us by
Plato himself in his dialogue named Phaedrus[22] and in imitation of the
example set us by the ancient Platonists to distinguish the several
kinds; by dividing them, first, into the most general; and then,
subdividing into the subordinate; till we come to those lower species,
that particularly and precisely denote the nature of the several
dialogues, and from which they ought to take their respective
denominations.

----------------
[22] Whoever is unable to divide and distinguish things into their
several sorts or species; and, on the other hand, referring every
particular to its proper species, to comprehend them all in one general
idea; will never understand any writings of which those things are the
subject, like a true critic, upon those high principles of art to which
the human understanding reaches. We have thought proper, here, to
paraphrase this passage, for the sake of giving to every part of so
important a sentence its full force, agreeably to the tenor of Plato's
doctrine; and in order to initiate our readers into a way of thinking,
that probably many of them are as yet unacquainted with.
----------------

The most general division of the writings of Plato, is into those of the
Sceptical kind, and those of they Dogmatical. In the former sort, nothing
is expressly either proved or asserted, some philosophical question only is
considered and examined; and the reader is left to himself to draw such
conclusions, and discover such truths as the philosopher means to
insinuate. This is done, either in the way of inquiry, or in the way of
controversy and dispute. In the way of controversy are carried on all such
dialogues, as tend to eradicate false opinions; and that, either indirectly,
by involving them in difficulties, and embarrassing the maintainers of them;
or directly, by confuting them. In the way of inquiry proceed those whose
tendency is to raise in the mind right opinions; and that either by exciting
to the pursuit of some part of wisdom, and showing in what manner to
investigate it; or by leading the way, and helping the mind forward in the
search. And this is effected by a process through opposing arguments.[23]

------------------
[23] It is necessary to observe that Plato in the Parmenides calls all
that part of his Dialectic, which proceeds through opposite arguments, an
exercise and wandering.
------------------

The dialogues of the other kind, the Dogmatical or Didactic, teach
explicitly some point of doctrine; and this they do either by laying it
down in the authoritative way, or by proving it in the ways of reason and
argument. In the authoritative way the doctrine is delivered, sometimes by
the speaker himself magisterially, at other times as derived to him by
tradition from wise men. The argumentative or demonstrative method of
teaching, used by Plato, proceeds in all the dialectic ways, dividing,
defining, demonstrating, and analysing; and the object of it consists in
exploring truth alone. According to this division is framed the following
scheme, or table:

DIALOGUES[24]

Sceptical Disputative Embarrassing Confuting Inquisitive Exciting Assisting
Dogmatical Demonstrative Analytical Inductional Authoritative Magisterial
Traditional

-----------------
[24]We have, given us by Diogenes Laertius, another division of the
characters, as he calls them, of Plato's writings, different from that
exhibited in the scheme above. This we have thought proper to subjoin, on
account of its antiquity and general reception.

Dialogues

Diadectic Speculative Physical Logical Practical Ethical Political
Inquisitive Gymnastic Maieutic Peirastic Agonistic Endeietic Anatreptic

The learned reader will observe the latter half of the dialogues, according
to this scheme, to be described by metaphors taken from the gymnastic art:
the dialogues, here termed gymnastic, being imagined to bear a similitude
to that exercise; the agonistic, to the combat. In the lowest subdivision,
indeed, the word maieutic is a metaphor of another kind, fully explained in
Plato's Theaetetus: the maieutic dialogues, however, were supposed to
resemble giving the rudiments of the art; as the peirastic were, to
represent a skirmish, or trial of proficiency; the endeietic were, it
seems, likened to the exhibiting a specimen of skill; and the anatreptic,
to presenting the spectacle of a thorough defeat, or sound drubbing. The
principal reason why we contented not ourselves with this account of the
difference between the dialogues of Plato, was the capital error there
committed in the first subdivision, of course extending itself through the
latter. This error consists in dividing the Didactic dialogues with regard
to their subject-matter; while those of the Inquisitive sort are divided
with respect to the manner of their composition. So that the subdivisions
fall not, with any propriety, under one and the same general head. Besides,
a novice in the works of Plato might hence be led naturally to suppose,
that the dogmatical or didactic dialogues are, all of them, written in the
same manner; and that the others, those of the inquisitive kind, by us
termed sceptical, have no particular subjects at all; or, if they have,
that their subjects are different from those of the didactic dialogues,
and are consequently unphilosophical. Now every one of the suppositions
here mentioned is far from being true.
----------------

The philosopher, in thus varying his manner, and diversifying his
writings into these several kinds, means not merely to entertain with
their variety; not to teach, on different occasions, with more or less
plainness and perspicuity; not yet to insinuate different degrees of
certainty in the doctrines themselves: but he takes this method, as a
consummate master of the art of composition in the dialogue-way of
writing, from the different characters of the speakers, as from different
elements in the frame of these dramatic dialogues, or different
ingredients in their mixture, producing some peculiar genius and turn of
temper, as it were, in each.

Socrates indeed is in almost all of them the principal speaker: but when
he falls into the company of some arrogant sophist; when the modest
wisdom, and clear science of the one, are contrasted with the confident
ignorance and blind opinionativeness of the other; dispute and
controversy must of course arise: where the false pretender cannot fail
of being either puzzled or confuted. To puzzle him only is sufficient,
if there be no other persons present; because such a man can never be
confuted in his own opinion: but when there is an audience round them,
in danger of being misled by sophistry into error, then is the true
philosopher to exert his utmost, and the vain sophist to be convicted
and exposed.

In some dialogues Plato represents his great master mixing in
conversation with young men of the best families in the commonwealth.
When these happen to have docile dispositions and fair minds, then is
occasion given to the philosopher to call forth[25] the latent seeds of
wisdom, and to cultivate the noble plants with true doctrine, in the
affable and familiar way of joint inquiry. To this is owing the
inquisitive genius of such dialogues: where, by a seeming equality in the
conversation, the curiosity or zeal of the mere stranger is excited; that
of the disciple is encouraged; and, by proper questions, the mind is
aided and forwarded in the search of truth.

-----------------
[25] We require exhortation, that we may be led to true good; dissuasion,
that we may be turned from things truly evil; obstetrication, that we may
draw forth our unperverted conceptions; and confutation, that we may be
purified from two-fold ignorance.
-----------------

At other times, the philosophic hero of these dialogues is introduced
in a higher character, engaged in discourse with men of more improved
understandings and enlightened minds. At such seasons he has an
opportunity of teaching in a more explicit manner, and of discovering
the reasons of things: for to such an audience truth is due, and all
demonstrations[26] possible in the teaching it. Hence, in the dialogues
composed of these persons, naturally arises the justly argumentative or
demonstrative genius; and this, as we have before observed, according to
all the dialectic methods.

-----------------
[26] The Platonists rightly observe, that Socrates, in these cases, makes
use of demonstrative and just reasoning, ([Greek: apodeiktikou]); whereas
to the novice he is contented with arguments only probable, ([Greek:
pithanois]); and against the litigious sophist often employs such as are
[Greek: eristikoi]; puzzling and contentious.
-----------------

But when the doctrine to be taught admits not of demonstration; of which
kind is the doctrine of antiquities, being only traditional, and a matter
of belief; and the doctrine of laws, being injunctional, and the matter of
obedience; the air of authority is then assumed: in the former cases, the
doctrine is traditionally handed down to others from the authority of
ancient sages; in the latter, is magisterially pronounced with the
authority of a legislator.[27]

-----------------
[27] It is necessary to observe, that in those dialogues in which Socrates
is indeed introduced, but sustains an inferior part, he is presented to
our view as a learner, and not as a teacher; and this is the case in the
Parmenides and Timaeus. For by the former of these philosophers he is
instructed in the most abtruse theological dogmas, and by the latter in
the whole of physiology.
-----------------

Thus much for the manner in which the dialogues of Plato are severally
composed, and the cast of genius given them in their composition. The
form under which they appear, or the external character that marks them,
is of three sorts: either purely dramatic, like the dialogue of tragedy
or comedy; or purely narrative, where a former conversation is supposed
to be committed to writing, and communicated to some absent friend; or of
the mixed kind, like a narration in dramatic poems, where is recited, to
some person present, the story of things past.

Having thus divided the dialogues of Plato, in respect of that inward
form or composition, which creates their genius; and again, with
reference to that outward form, which marks them, like flowers and other
vegetables, with a certain character; we are further to make a division
of them, with regard to their subject and their design; beginning with
their design, or end, because for the sake of this are all the subjects
chosen. The end of all the writings of Plato is that, which is the end of
all true philosophy or wisdom, the perfection and the happiness of man.
Man therefore is the general subject; and the first business of philosophy
must be to inquire what is that being called man, who is to be made happy;
and what is his nature, in the perfection of which is placed his happiness.
As however, in the preceding part of this Introduction, we have endeavored
to give the outlines of Plato's doctrine concerning man, it is unnecessary
in this place to say any thing further on that subject.

The dialogues of Plato, therefore, with respect to their subjects, may be
divided into the speculative, the practical, and such as are of a mixed
nature. The subjects of these last are either general, comprehending both
the others; or differential, distinguishing them. The general subject are
either fundamental, or final: those of the fundamental kind are philosophy,
human nature, the soul of man; of the final kind are love, beauty, good.
The differential regard knowledge, as it stands related to practice; in
which are considered two questions: one of which is, whether virtue is to
he taught; the other is, whether error in the will depends on error in
the judgment. The subjects of the speculative dialogues relate either to
words, or to things. Of the former sort are etymology, sophistry, rhetoric,
poetry; of the latter sort are science, true being, the principles of
mind, outward nature. The practical subjects relate either to private
conduct, and the government of the mind over the whole man; or to his
duty towards others in his several relations; or to the government of a
civil state, and the public conduct of a whole people. Under these three
heads rank in order the particular subjects practical; virtue in general,
sanctity, temperance, fortitude, justice, friendship, patriotism, piety;
the ruling mind in a civil government, the frame and order of a state,
law in general, and lastly, those rules of government and of public
conduct, the civil laws.

Thus, for the sake of giving the reader a scientific, that is a
comprehensive, and at the same time a distinct view of Plato's writings,
we have attempted to exhibit to him, their just and natural distinctions;
whether he chooses to consider them with regard to their inward form or
essence, their outward form or appearance, their matter; or their end:
that is, in those more familiar terms, we have used in this Synopsis,
their genius, their character, their subject, and their design.

And here it is requisite to observe, that as it is the characteristic of
the highest good to be universally beneficial, though some things are
benefitted by it more and others less, in consequence of their greater or
less aptitude to receive it; in like manner the dialogues of Plato are
so largely stamped with the characters of sovereign good, that they are
calculated to benefit in a certain degree even those who are incapable
of penetrating their profundity. They can tame a savage sophist, like
Thrasymachus in the Republic; humble the arrogance even of those who
are ignorant of their ignorance; make those to become proficients in
political, who will never arrive at theoretic virtue; and, in short, like
the illuminations of deity, wherever there is any portion of aptitude in
their recipients, they purify, irradiate, and exalt.

After this general view of the dialogues of Plato, let us in the next
place consider their preambles, the digressions with which they abound,
and the character of the style in which they are written. With respect to
the first of these, the preambles, however superfluous they may at first
sight appear, they will be found on a closer inspection necessary to the
design of the dialogues which they accompany. Thus the prefatory part of
the Timaeus unfolds, in images agreeably to the Pythagoric custom, the
theory of the world; and the first part of the Parmenides, or the
discussion of ideas, is in fact merely a preamble to the second part,
or the speculation of the one; to which however it is essentially
preparatory. Hence, as Plutarch says, when he speaks of Plato's dialogue
on the Atlantic island: These preambles are superb gates and magnificent
courts with which he purposely embellishes his great edifices, that
nothing may be wanting to their beauty, and that all may be equally
splendid. He acts, as Dacier well observes, like a great prince, who,
when he builds a sumptuous palace, adorns (in the language of Pindar) the
vestibule with golden pillars. For it is fit that what is first seen
should be splendid and magnificent, and should as it were perspicuously
announce all that grandeur which afterwards presents itself to the view.

With respect to the frequent digressions in his dialogues, these also,
when accurately examined, will be found to be no less subservient to the
leading design of the dialogues in which they are introduced; at the same
time that they afford a pleasing relaxation to the mind from the labor of
severe investigation. Hence Plato, by the most happy and enchanting art,
contrives to lead the reader to the temple of Truth through the delightful
groves and valleys of the Graces. In short, this circuitous course, when
attentively considered, will be found to be the shortest road by which he
could conduct the reader to the desired end: for in accomplishing this it
is necessary to regard not that road, which is most straight in the
nature of things, or abstractedly considered, but that which is most
direct in the progressions of human understanding.

With respect to the style of Plato, though it forms in reality the
most inconsiderable part of the merit of his writings, style in all
philosophical works being the last thing that should be attended to, yet
even in this Plato may contend for the palm of excellence with the most
renowned masters of diction. Hence we find that his style was the
admiration of the finest writers of antiquity. According to Ammianus,
Jupiter himself would not speak otherwise, if he were to converse in the
Attic tongue. Aristotle considered his style as a medium between poetry
and prose. Cicero no less praises him for the excellence of his diction
than the profundity of his conceptions; and Longinus calls him with
respect to his language, the rival of Homer. Hence he is considered by
this prince of critics, as deriving into himself abundant streams from
the Homeric fountain, and is compared by him, in his rivalship of Homer,
to a new antagonist who enters the lists against one that is already the
object of universal admiration.

Notwithstanding this praise, however, Plato has been accused, as Longinus
informs us, of being frequently hurried away as by a certain Bacchic fury
of words to immoderate and unpleasant metaphors, and an allegoric
magnificence of diction. Longinus excuses this by saying that whatever
naturally excels in magnitude possesses very little of purity. For that,
says he, which is in every respect accurate is in danger of littleness.
He adds, "and may not this also be necessary, that those of an abject and
moderate genius, because they never encounter danger, nor aspire after
the summit of excellence, are for the most part without error and remain
in security; but that great things become insecure through their magnitude?"
Indeed it appears to me, that whenever this exuberance, this Bacchic
fury, occurs in the diction of Plato, it is owing to the magnitude of the
inspiring influence of deity with which he is then replete. For that he
sometimes wrote from divine inspiration is evident from his own confession
in the Phaedrus, a great part of which is not so much like an orderly
discourse as a dithyrambic poem. Such a style therefore, as it is the
progeny of divine mania, which, as Plato justly observes, is better than
all human prudence, spontaneously adapts itself to its producing cause,
imitates a supernatural power as far as this can be effected by words,
and thus necessarily becomes magnificent, vehement, and exuberant; for
such are the characteristics of its source. All judges of composition
however, both ancient and modern, are agreed that his style is in general
graceful and pure; and that it is sublime without being impetuous and
rapid. It is indeed no less harmonious than elevated, no less accurate[27]
than magnificent. It combines the force of the greatest orators with the
graces of the first of poets; and in short; is a river to which those
justly celebrated lines of Denham may be most pertinently applied:

  Tho' deep, yet clear;  tho' gentle, yet not dull;
  Strong without rage, without o'erfowing full.

-----------------
[27] The reader will see, from the notes on Plato's dialogues, and
particularly from the notes on the Parmenides and Timaeus, that the style
of that philosopher possesses an accuracy which is not to be found in any
modern writer; an accuracy of such a wonderful nature, that the words are
exactly commensurate with the sense. Hence the reader who has happily
penetrated his profundity finds, with astonishment, that another word
could not have been added without being superfluous, nor one word taken
away without injuring the sense. The same observation may also be applied
to the style of Aristotle.
-----------------

Having thus considered the philosophy of Plato, given a general view of
his writings, and made some observations on his style, it only now
remains to speak of the following arrangement of his dialogues and
translation of his works, and then, with a few appropriate observations,
to close this Introduction.

As no accurate and scientific arrangement then of these dialogues has
been transmitted to us from the ancients, I was under the necessity of
adopting an arrangement of my own, which I trust is not unscientific,
however inferior it may be to that which was doubtless made, though
unfortunately lost, by the latter interpreters of Plato. In my
arrangement, therefore, I have imitated the order of the universe in
which, as I have already observed, wholes precede parts, and universals
particulars. Hence I have placed those dialogues first which rank as
wholes, or have the relation of a system, and afterwards those in which
these systems are branch out into particulars. Thus, after the First
Alcibiades, which may be called, and appears to have been generally
considered by the ancients an introduction to the whole of Plato's
philosophy, I have placed the Republic and the Laws, which may be said to
comprehend systematically the morals and politics of Plato. After these I
have ranked the Timaeus, which contains the whole of his physiology, and
together with it the Critias, because of its connection with the Timaeus.
The next in order is the Parmenides, which contains a system of his
theology. Thus far this arrangement is conformable to the natural progress
of the human mind in the acquisition of the sublimest knowledge; the
subsequent arrangement principally regards the order of things. After the
Parmenides then, the Sophista, Phaedrus, Greater Hippias, and Banquet,
follow, which may be considered as so many lesser wholes subordinate to
and comprehended in the Parmenides, which, like the universe itself, is a
whole of wholes. For in the Sophista being itself is investigated, in the
Banquet love itself, and in the Phaedrus beauty itself; all which are
intelligible forms, and are consequently contained in the Parmenides, in
which the whole extent of the intelligible is unfolded. The Greater
Hippias is classed with the Phaedrus, because in the latter the whole
series of the beautiful is discussed, and in the former that which
subsists in soul. After these follows the Theaetetus, in which science
considered as subsisting in soul is investigated; science itself,
according to its first subsistence, having been previously celebrated by
Socrates in one part of the Phaedrus. The Politicus and Minos, which
follow next, may be considered as ramifications from the Laws; and, in
short, all the following dialogues either consider more particularly the
dogmas which are systematically comprehended in those already enumerated,
or naturally flow from them as their original source. As it did not
however appear possible to arrange these dialogues which rank as parts in
the same accurate order as those which we considered as whole, it was
thought better to class them either according to their agreement in one
particular circumstance, as the Phaedo, Apology, and Crito, all which
relate to the death of Socrates, and as the Meno and Protagoras, which
relate to the question whether virtue can be taught; or according to
their agreement in character, as the Lesser Hippias and Euthydemus, which
are anatreptic, and the Theages, Laches, and Lysis, which are maieutic
dialogues. The Cratylus is ranked in the last place, not so much because
the subject of it is etymology, as because a great part of it is deeply
theological; for by this arrangement, after having ascended to all the
divine orders and their ineffable principle in the Parmenides, and thence
descended in a regular series to the human soul in the subsequent
dialogues, the reader is again led back to deity in this dialogue, and
thus imitates the order which all beings observe, that of incessantly
returning to the principles whence they flew.

After the dialogues[28] follow the Epistles of Plato, which are in every
respect worthy that prince of all true philosophers. They are not only
written with great elegance, and occasionally with magnificence of
diction, but with all the becoming dignity of a mind conscious of its
superior endowments, and all the authority of a master in philosophy.
They are likewise replete with many admirable political observations,
and contain some of his most abstruse dogmas, which though delivered
enigmatically, yet the manner in which they are delivered, elucidates at
the same time that it is elucidated by what is said of these dogmas in
his more theological dialogues.

-----------------
[28] As I profess to give the reader a translation of the genuine works
of Plato only, I have not translated the Axiochus, Demodoeus, Sisyphus,
&c. as these are evidently spurious dialogues.
-----------------

With respect, to the following translation, it is necessary to observe, in
the first place, than the numbers of legitimate dialogues of Plato is
fifty-five; for though the Republic forms but one treatise, and the Laws
another, yet the former consists of ten, and the latter of twelve books,
and each of these books is a dialogue. Hence, as there are thirty-three
dialogues, besides the Laws and the Republic, fifty-five will, as we have
said, be the amount of the whole. Of these fifty-five, the nine following
have been translated by Mr. Sydenham; viz. the First and Second Alcibiades,
the Greater and Lesser Hippias, the Banquet (except the speech of
Alcibiades), the Philebus, the Meno, the Io, and the Rivals.[29] I have
already observed, and with deep regret, that this excellent though
unfortunate scholar died before he had made that proficiency in the
philosophy of Plato which might have been reasonably expected from so fair
a beginning. I personally knew him only in the decline of life, when his
mental powers were not only considerably impaired by age, but greatly
injured by calamity. His life had been very stormy; his circumstances, for
many years preceding his death, were indigent; his patrons were by no means
liberal; and his real friends were neither numerous nor affluent. He began
the study of Plato, as he himself informed me, when he had considerably
passed the meridian of life, and with most unfortunate prejudices against
his best disciples, which I attempted to remove during my acquaintance with
him, and partly succeeded in the attempt; but infirmity and death prevented
its completion. Under such circumstances it was not to be expected that he
would fathom the profundity of Plato's conceptions, and arrive at the
summit of philosophic attainments. I saw, however, that his talents and his
natural disposition were such as might have ranked him among the best of
Plato's interpreters, if he had not yielded to the pressure of calamity, if
he had not nourished such baneful prejudices, and if he had not neglected
philosophy in the early part of life. Had this happened, my labors would
have been considerably lessened, or perhaps rendered entirely unnecessary,
and his name would have been transmitted to posterity with undecaying
renown. As this unfortunately did not happen, I have been under the
necessity of diligently examining and comparing with the original all
those parts of the dialogues which he translated, that are more deeply
philosophical, or that contain any thing of the theology of Plato. In
these, as might be expected, I found him greatly deficient; I found him
sometimes mistaking the meaning through ignorance of Plato's more sublime
tenets, and at other times perverting it, in order to favor some opinions
of his own. His translation however of other parts which are not so
abstruse is excellent. In these he not only presents the reader faithfully
with the matter, but likewise with the genuine manner of Plato. The notes
too which accompany the translation of these parts generally exhibit just
criticism and extensive learning, an elegant taste, and a genius naturally
philosophic. Of these notes I have preserved as much as was consistent with
the limits and design of the following work.

-----------------
[29] In the notes on the above-mentioned nine dialogues, those written
by Mr. Sydenham are signed S., and those by myself T.
-----------------

Of the translation of the Republic by Dr. Spens, it is necessary to observe
that a considerable part of it is very faithfully executed; but that in the
more abstruse parts it is inaccurate; and that it every where abounds with
Scotticisms which offend an English ear, and vulgarisms which are no less
disgraceful to the translator than disgusting to the reader. Suffice it
therefore to say of this version, that I have adopted it wherever I found
it could with propriety be adopted, and given my own translation where it
was otherwise.

Of the ten dialogues translated by Dacier, I can say nothing with
accuracy, because I have no knowledge whatever of the French language;
but if any judgment may be formed of this work, from a translation of it
into English, I will be bold to say that it is by no means literal, and
that he very frequently mistakes the sense of the original. From this
translation therefore I could derive but little assistance; some however
I have derived, and that little I willingly acknowledge. In translating
the rest of Plato's works, and this, as the reader may easily see, form
by far the greatest part of them, I have had no assistance from any
translation except that of Ficinus, the general excellency of which is
well known to every student of Plato, arising not only from his
possessing a knowledge of Platonism superior to that of any translators
that have followed him, but likewise from his having made this
translation from a very valuable manuscript in the Medicean library,
which is now no longer to be found. I have, however, availed myself of
the learned labors of the editors of various dialogues of Plato; such as
the edition of the Rivals, Euthyphro, Apology, Crito, and Phaedo, by
Forster; of the First and Second Alcibiades and Hipparchus, by Etwall; of
the Meno, First Alcibiades, Phaedo and Phaedrus, printed at Vienna, 1784;
of the Cratylus and Theaetetus, by Fischer; of the Republic, by Massey;
and of the Euthydemus and Gorgias, by Dr. Routh, president of Magdalen
College, Oxford. This last editor has enriched his edition of these two
dialogues with very valuable and copious philological and critical notes,
in which he has displayed no less learning than judgment, no less
acuteness than taste. He appears indeed to me to be one of the best and
most modest of philologists; and it is to be hoped that he will be
imitated in what he has done by succeeding editors of Plato's text.

If my translation had been made with an eye to the judgment of the many,
it would have been necessary to apologize for its literal exactness.
Had I been anxious to gratify false taste with respect to composition, I
should doubtless have attended less to the precise meaning of the original,
have omitted almost all connective Particles, have divided long periods
into a number of short ones, and branched out the strong and deep river of
Plato's language into smooth-gliding, shallow, and feeble streams; but as
the present work was composed with the hope indeed of benefitting all, but
with an eye to the criticism solely of men of elevated souls, I have
endeavored not to lose a word of the original; and yet at the same time
have attempted to give the translation as much elegance as such verbal
accuracy can be supposed capable of admitting. I have also endeavored to
preserve the manner as well as the matter of my author, being fully
persuaded that no translation deserves applause, in which both these are
not as much as possible preserved.

My principal object in this arduous undertaking has been to unfold all
the abstruse and sublime dogmas of Plato, as they are found dispersed in
his works. Minutely to unravel the art which he employs in the
composition of all his dialogues, and to do full justice to his meaning
in every particular, must be the task of some one who has more leisure,
and who is able to give the works of Plato to the public on a more
extensive plan. In accomplishing this great object, I have presented the
reader in my notes with nearly the substance in English of all the
following manuscript Greek Commentaries and Scholia on Plato; viz. of the
Commentaries of Proclus on the Parmenides and First Alcibiades; and of
his Scholia on the Cratylus; of the Scholia of Olympiodorus on the
Phaedo, Gorgias, and Philebus; and of Hermeas on the Phoedrus. To these
are added very copious extracts from the manuscript of Damascius,[30]
Peri Archon, and from the published works of Proclus on the Timeus,
Republic, and Theology of Plato. Of the four first of these manuscripts,
three of which are folio volumes, I have complete copies taken with my
own hand; and of the copious extracts from the others, those from
Olympiodorus on the Gorgias were taken by me from the copy preserved in
the British Museum; those from the same philosopher on the Philebus, and
those from Hermeas on the Phaedrus, and Damascius Peri Archon, from the
copies in the Bodleian library.

-----------------
[30] Patricius was one of the very few in modern times who have been
sensible of the great merit of these writings, as is evident from the
extract from the preface to his translation of Proclus's Theological
Elements. (Ferrar. 4to. 1583.) Patricius, prior to this, enumerates the
writings of Proclus, and they are included in his wish that all the
manuscript Greek commentaries on Plato were made public.
-----------------

And here gratitude demands that I should publicly acknowledge the very
handsome and liberal manner in which I was received by the University of
Oxford, and by the principal librarian and sub-librarians of the Bodleian
library, during the time that I made the above mentioned extracts. In the
first place I have to acknowledge the very polite attention which was paid
to me by Dr. Jackson,[31] dean of Christ-church. In the second place, the
liberty of attendance at the Bodleian library, and the accommodation which
was there afforded me, by the librarians of that excellent collection,
demand from me no small tribute of praise. And, above all, the very liberal
manner in which I was received by the fellows of New College, with whom I
resided for three weeks, and from whom I experienced even Grecian
hospitality, will, I trust, be as difficult a task for time to obliterate
from my memory, as it would be for me to express it as it deserves.

-----------------
[31] I was much pleased to find that this very respectable prelate is a
great admirer of Aristotle, and that extracts from the Commentaries of
Simplicius and Ammonius on the Categories of that philosopher, are read
by his orders in the college of which he is the head.
-----------------

With respect to the faults which I may have committed in this translation
(for I am not vain enough to suppose it is without fault), I might plead
as an excuse, that the whole of it has been executed amidst severe
endurance from bodily infirmity and indigent circumstances; and that a
very considerable part of it was accomplished amidst other ills of no
common magnitude, and other labors inimical to such an undertaking. But
whatever may be my errors, I will not fly to calamity for an apology. Let
it be my excuse that the mistakes I may have committed in lesser
particulars, have arisen from my eagerness to seize and promulgate those
great truths in the philosophy and theology of Plato, which though they
have been concealed for ages in oblivion, have a subsistence coeval with
the universe, and will again be restored, and flourish for very extended
periods, through all the infinite revolutions of time.

In the next place, it is necessary to speak concerning the qualifications
requisite in a legitimate student of the philosophy of Plato, previous to
which I shall just notice the absurdity of supposing that a mere knowledge
of the Greek tongue, however great that knowledge may be, is alone
sufficient to the understanding the sublime doctrines of Plato; for a man
might as well think that he can understand Archimedes without a knowledge
of the elements of geometry, merely because he can read him in the
original. Those who entertain such an idle opinion, would do well to
meditate on the profound observation of Heraclitus, "that polymathy does
not teach intellect," ([Greek: Polymathic noon ou didaskei]).

By a legitimate student, then, of the Platonic philosophy, I mean one
who, both from nature and education, is properly qualified for such
an arduous undertaking; that is one who possesses a naturally good
disposition; is sagacious and acute, and is inflamed with an ardent
desire for the acquisition of wisdom and truth; who from his childhood
has been well instructed in the mathematical disciplines; who, besides
this, has spent whole days, and frequently the greater part of the night,
in profound meditation; and, like one triumphantly sailing over a raging
sea, or skillfully piercing through an army of foes, has successfully
encountered an hostile multitude of doubts;--in short, who has never
considered wisdom as a thing of trifling estimation and easy access, but
as that which cannot be obtained without the most generous and severe
endurance, and the intrinsic worth of which surpasses all corporeal good,
far more than the ocean the fleeting bubble which floats on its surface.
To such as are destitute of these requisites, who make the study of words
their sole employment, and the pursuit of wisdom but at best a secondary
thing, who expect to be wise by desultory application for an hour or two
in a day, after the fatigues of business, after mixing with the base
multitude of mankind, laughing with the gay affecting airs of gravity
with the serious, tacitly assenting to every man's opinion, however
absurd, and winking at folly however shameful and base--to such as
these--and, alas! the world is full of such--the sublimest truths must
appear to be nothing more than jargon and reverie, the dreams of a
distempered imagination, or the ebullitions of fanatical faith.

But all this is by no means wonderful, if we consider that two-fold
ignorance is the disease of the many. For they are not only ignorant with
respect to the sublimest knowledge, but they are even ignorant of their
ignorance. Hence they never suspect their want of understanding, but
immediately reject a doctrine which appears at first sight absurd,
because it is too splendid for their bat-like eyes to behold. Or if they
even yield their assent to its truth, their very assent is the result of
the same most dreadful disease of the soul. For they will fancy, says
Plato, that they understand the highest truths, when the very contrary is
really the case. I earnestly therefore entreat men of this description,
not to meddle with any of the profound speculations of the Platonic
philosophy, for it is more dangerous to urge them to such an employment,
than to advise them to follow their sordid avocations with unwearied
assiduity, and toil for wealth with increasing alacrity and vigor; as
they will by this means give free scope to the base habits of their soul,
and sooner suffer that punishment which in such as these must always
precede mental illumination, and be the inevitable consequence of guilt.
It is well said indeed by Lysis, the Pythagorean, that to inculcate
liberal speculations and discourses to those whose morals are turbid and
confused, is just as absurd as to pour pure and transparent water into a
deep well full of mire and clay; for he who does this will only disturb
the mud, and cause the pure water to become defiled. The woods of such,
as the same author beautifully observes, (that is the irrational or
corporeal life), in which these dire passions are nourished, must first
be purified with fire and sword, and every kind of instrument (that is,
through preparatory disciplines, and the political virtues), and reason
must be freed from its slavery to the affections, before any thing useful
can be planted in these savage haunts.

Let not such then presume to explore the regions of Platonic philosophy.
The land is too pure to admit the sordid and the base. The road which
conducts to it is too intricate to be discovered by the unskillful and
stupid, and the journey is too long and laborious to be accomplished by
the effeminate and the timid, by the slave of passion and the dupe of
opinion, by the lover of sense and the despiser of truth. The dangers and
difficulties in the undertaking are such as can be sustained by none but
the most hardy and accomplished adventurers; and he who begins the journey
without the strength of Hercules, or the wisdom and patience of Ulysses,
must be destroyed by the wild beasts of the forest, or perish in the storms
of the ocean; must suffer transmutation into a beast through the magic
power of Circe, or be exiled for life by the detaining charm of Calypso;
and in short must descend into Hades, and wander in its darkness, without
emerging from thence to the bright regions of the morning, or be ruined
by the deadly melody of the Syren's song. To the most skillful traveler,
who pursues the right road with an ardor which no toils can abate, with
a vigilance which no weariness can surprise into negligence, and with
virtue which no temptations can seduce, it exhibits for many years the
appearance of the Ithaca of Ulysses, or the flying Italy of AEneas; for
we no sooner gain a glimpse of the pleasing land which is to be the end
of our journey, than it is suddenly ravished from our view, and we still
find ourselves at a distance from the beloved coast, exposed to the fury
of a stormy sea of doubts.

Abandon then, ye groveling souls, the fruitless design! Pursue with
avidity the beaten road which leads to popular honors and sordid gain,
but relinquish all thoughts of a voyage for which you are totally
unprepared. Do you not perceive what a length of sea separates you from
the royal coast? A sea,

  Huge, horrid, vast, where scarce in safety sails
  The best built ship, though Jove inspire the gales.

And may we not very justly ask you, similar to the interrogation of
Calypso,

  What ships have you, what sailors to convey,
  What oars to cut the long laborious way?

I shall only observe further, that the life of Plato, by Olympiodorus, was
prefixed to this translation, in preference to that by Diogenes Laertius,
because the former is the production of a most eminent Platonist, and the
latter of a mere historian, who indiscriminately gave to the public whatever
anecdotes he found in other authors. If the reader combines this short
sketch of the life of Plato with what that philosopher says of himself in
his 7th Epistle, he will be in possession of the most important particulars
about him that can be obtained at present.



EXPLANATIONS OF CERTAIN PLATONIC TERMS

As some apology may be thought necessary for having introduced certain
unusual words of Greek origin, I shall only observe, that, as all arts and
sciences have certain appropriate terms peculiar to themselves, philosophy,
which is the art of arts, and science of sciences, as being the mistress of
both, has certainly a prior and a far superior claim to this privilege. I
have not, however, introduced, I believe, any of these terms without at the
same time sufficiently explaining them; but, lest the contrary should have
taken place, the following explanation of all such terms as I have been
able to recollect, and also of common words used by Platonists in a
peculiar sense, is subjoined for the information of the reader.

Anagogic, [Greek: anagogikos]. Leading on high.

Demiurgus, [Greek: demiourgos]. Jupiter, the artificer of the universe.

Dianoetia. This word is derived from [Greek: dianoia], or that power of
the soul which reasons scientifically, deriving the principles of its
reasoning from intellect. Plato is so uncommonly accurate in his diction,
that this word is very seldom used by him in any other than its primary
sense.

The Divine, [Greek: to Theion], is being subsisting in conjunction with
the one. For all things, except the one, viz. essence, life, and
intellect, are considered by Plato as suspended from and secondary to the
gods. For the gods do not subsist in, but prior to, these, which they
also produce and connect, but are not characterized by these. In many
places, however, Plato calls the participants of the gods by the names of
the gods. For not only the Athenian Guest in the Laws, but also Socrates
in the Phaedrus, calls a divine soul a god. "For," says he, "all the
horses and charioteers of the gods are good," &c. And afterwards, still
more clearly, he adds, "And this is the life of the gods." And not only
this, but he also denominates those nature gods that are always united to
the gods, and which, in conjunction with them, give completion to one
series. He also frequently calls daemons gods, though, according to
essence, they are secondary to and subsist about the gods. For in the
Phaedrus, Timaeus, and other dialogues, he extends the appellation of
gods as far as the daemons. And what is still more paradoxical than all
this, he does not refuse to call some men gods; as, for instance, the
Elean Guest in the Sophista. From all this, therefore, we must infer that
with respect to the word god, one thing which is thus denominated is
simply deity; another is so according to union; a third, according to
participation; a fourth, according to contact; and a fifth, according to
similitude. Thus every superessential nature is primarily a god; but
every intellectual nature is so according to union. And again, every
divine soul is a god according to participation; but divine daemons are
gods according to contact with the gods; and the souls of men obtain this
appellation through similitude. Each of these, however, except the first,
is as we have said, rather divine than a god; for the Athenian Guest in
the Laws, calls intellect itself divine. But that which is divine is
secondary to the first deity, in the same manner as the united is to the
one; that which is intellectual to intellect; and that which is animated
to soul. Indeed, things more uniform and simple always precede, and the
series of beings ends in the one itself.

Doxastic. This word is derived from doxa, opinion, and signifies that
which is apprehended by opinion, or that power which is the extremity of
the rational soul. This power knows the universal in particulars, as that
every man is a rational animal; but it knows not the dioti, or why a
thing is, but only the oti, or that it is.

The Eternal, [Greek: To aionion], that which has a never-ending subsistence,
without any connection with time; or, as Plotinus profoundly defines it,
infinite life at once total and full.

That which is generated, [Greek: to geneton]. That which has not the
whole of its essence or energy subsisting at once without temporal
dispersion.

Generation, [Greek: genesis]. An essence composite and multiform, and
conjoined with time. This is the proper signification of the word; but it
is used symbolically by Plato, and also by theologists more ancient than
Plato, for the sake of indication. For as Proclus beautifully observes
(in MS. Comment in Parmenidem), "Fables call the ineffable unfolding into
light through causes, generation." "Hence," he adds in the Orphic
writings, the first cause is denominated time; for where there is
generation, according to its proper signification, there also there
is time."

A Guest, [Greek: Xenos]. This word, in its more ample signification in
the Greek, denotes a stranger, but properly implies one who receives
another, or is himself received at an entertainment. In the following
dialogues, therefore, wherever one of the speakers is introduced as a
Xenos, I have translated this word guest, as being more conformable to
the genius of Plato's dialogues, which may be justly called rich mental
banquets, and consequently the speakers in them may be considered as so
many guests. Hence in the Timaeus, the persons of that dialogue are
expressly spoken of as guests.

Hyparxis, [Greek: uparxis]. The first principle or foundation, as it
were, of the essence of a thing. Hence also, it is the summit of essence.

Idiom, [Greek: Idioma]. The characteristic peculiarity of a thing.

The Immortal, [Greek: To athanaton]. According to Plato, there are many
orders of immortality, pervading from on high to the last of things; and
the ultimate echo, as it were, of immorality is seen in the perpetuity of
the mundane wholes, which according to the doctrine of the Elean Guest in
the Politicus, they participate from the Father of the universe. For both
the being and the life of every body depend on another cause; since body
is not itself naturally adapted to connect, or adorn, or preserve itself.
But the immortality of partial souls, such as ours, is more manifest and
more perfect than this of the perpetual bodies in the universe; as is
evident from the many demonstrations which are given of it in the Phaedo,
and in the 10th book of the Republic. For the immortality of partial
souls has a more principal subsistence, as possessing in itself the cause
of eternal permanency. But prior to both these is the immortality of
daemons; for these neither verge to mortality, nor are they filled with
the nature of things which are generated and corrupted. More venerable,
however, than these, and essentially transcending them, is the
immortality of divine souls, which are primarily self-motive, and contain
the fountains and principles of the life which is attributed about
bodies, and through which bodies participate of renewed immortality. And
prior to all these is the immortality of the gods: for Diotima in the
Banquet does not ascribe an immortality of this kind to demons. Hence
such an immortality as this is separate and exempt from wholes. For,
together with the immortality of the gods, eternity subsists, which is
the fountain of all immortality and life, as well that life which is
perpetual, as that which is dissipated into nonentity. In short,
therefore, the divine immortal is that which is generative and connective
of perpetual life. For it is not immortal, as participating of life, but
as supplying divine life, and deifying life itself.

Imparticipable, [Greek: To amethekton]. That which is not consubsistent
with an inferior nature. Thus imparticipable intellect is an intellect
which is not consubsistent with soul.

Intellectual Projection, [Greek: noera epibole]. As the perception of
intellect is immediate, being a darting forth, as it were, directly to
its proper objects, this direct intuition is expressed by the term
projection.

The Intelligible, [Greek: To noeton]. This word in Plato and Platonic
writers has a various signification: for, in the first place, whatever is
exempt from sensibles, and has its essence separate from them, is said to
be intelligible, and in this sense soul is intelligible. In the second
place, intellect, which is prior to soul, is intelligible. In the third
place, that which is more ancient than intellect, which replenishes
intelligence and is essentially perfective of it, is called intelligible;
and this is the intelligible which Timaeus in Plato places in the order
of a paradigm, prior to the demiurgic intellect and intellectual energy.
But beyond these is the divine intelligible, which is defined according
to divine union and hyparxis. For this is intelligible as the object of
desire to intellect, as giving perfection to and containing it, and as
the completion of being. The highest intelligible, therefore, is that
which is the hyparxis of the gods; the second, that which is true being,
and the first essence; the third, intellect, and all intellectual life;
and the fourth, the order belonging to soul.

Logismos, reasoning. When applied to divinity as by Plato in the Timaeus,
signifies a distributive cause of things.

On account of which; with reference to which; through which; according to
which, from which; or in which; viz. [Greek: di o, uph' ou, di ou, kath'
o, ex ou]. By the first of these terms, Plato is accustomed to denominate
the final cause; by the second the paradigmatic; by the third, the
demiurgic; by the fourth, the instrumental; by the fifth, form; and by
the sixth, matter.

Orectic. This word is derived from [Greek: orexis], appetite.

Paradigm, [Greek: paradeigma]. A pattern, or that with reference to which
a thing is made.

The perpetual, [Greek: to aidion]. That which subsists forever, but through
a connection with time.

A Politician, [Greek: politikos]. This word, as Mr. Sydenham justly
observes in his notes in the Rivals, is of a very large and extensive
import as used by Plato, and the other ancient writers on politics: for
it includes all those statesmen or politicians in aristocracies and
democracies, who were, either for life, or for a certain time, invested
with the whole or a part of kingly authority, and the power thereto
belonging. See the Politicus.

Prudence, [Greek: Phronesis]. This word frequently means in Plato and
Platonic writers, the habit of discerning what is good in all moral
actions, and frequently signifies intelligence, or intellectual
Perception. The following admirable explanation of this word is given by
Jamblichus Prudence having a precedaneous subsistence, receives its
generation from a pure and perfect intellect. Hence it looks to intellect
itself, is perfected by it, and has this as the measure and most
beautiful paradigm of all its energies. If also we have any communion
with the gods, it is especially effected by this virtue; and through this
we are in the highest degree assimilated to them. The knowledge too of
such things as are good, profitable, and beautiful, and of the contraries
to these, is obtained by this virtue; and the judgment and correction of
works proper to be done are by this directed. And in short it is a
certain governing leader of men, and of the whole arrangement of their
nature; and referring cities and houses, and the particular life, of
every one to a divine paradigm, it forms them according to the best
similitude; obliterating some things and purifying others. So that
prudence renders its possessors similar to divinity. Jamblic. apud.
Stob. p. 141.

Psychical, [Greek: psychikos]. Pertaining to soul.

Science. This word is sometimes defined by Plato to be that which assigns
the causes of things; sometimes to be that the subjects of which have a
perfectly stable essence; and together with this, he conjoins the
assignation of cause from reasoning. Sometimes again he defines it to be
that the principles of which are not hypotheses; and, according to this
definition, he asserts that there is one science which ascends as far as
to the principle of things. For this science considers that which is
truly the principle as unhypothetic, has for its subject true being, and
produces its reasonings from cause. According to the second definition,
he calls dianoetic knowledge science; but according to the first alone,
he assigns to physiology the appellation of science.

The telestic art. The art pertaining to mystic ceremonies.

Theurgic. This word is derived from [Greek: Theourgia], or that religious
operation which deifies him by whom it is performed as much as is possible
to man.

Truth, [Greek: aletheia]. Plato, following ancient theologists, considers
truth multifariously. Hence, according to his doctrine, the highest truth
is characterized by unity, and is the light proceeding from the good,
which imparts purity, as he says in the Philebus, and union, as he says
in the Republic, to intelligibles. The truth which is next to this in
dignity is that which proceeds from intelligibles, and illuminates the
intellectual orders, and which an essence unfigured, uncolored, and
without contact, first receives, where also the plain of truth is
situated, as it is written in the Phaedrus. The third kind of truth is,
that which is connascent with souls, and which through intelligence comes
into contact with true being. For the psychical light is the third, from
the intelligible; intellectual deriving its plenitude from intelligible
light, and the psychical from the intellectual. And the last kind of
truth is that which is full of error and inaccuracy through sense, and
the instability of its object. For a material nature is perpetually
flowing, and is not naturally adapted to abide even for a moment.

The following beautiful description of the third kind of truth, or that
which subsists in souls, is given by Jamblichus: "Truth, as the name
implies, makest a conversion about the gods and their incorporeal energy;
but, doxastic imitation, which, as Plato says, is fabricative of images,
wanders about that which is deprived of divinity and is dark. And the
former indeed receives its perfection in intelligible and divine forms,
and real beings which have a perpetual sameness of subsistence; but the
latter looks to that which is formless, and non-being, and which has a
various subsistence; and, about this it's visive power is blunted. The
former contemplates that which is, but the latter assumes such a form as
appears to the many. Hence the former associates with intellect, and
increases the intellectual nature which we contain; but the latter, from
looking to that which always seems to be, hunts after folly and
deceives." Jamblic. apud Stob. p. 136.

The unical, [Greek: to niaion]. That which is characterized by unity.

--------------------

THE MEANING OF THE WORD "PHILOSOPHY" IN THE PAST AND IN THE PRESENT

I must warn the reader at the outset that the title of this chapter
seems to promise a great deal more than he will find carried out in the
chapter itself.  To tell all that philosophy has meant in the past, and
all that it means to various classes of men in the present, would be a
task of no small magnitude, and one quite beyond the scope of such a
volume as this.  But it is not impossible to give within small compass
a brief indication, at least, of what the word once signified, to show
how its signification has undergone changes, and to point out to what
sort of a discipline or group of disciplines educated men are apt to
apply the word, notwithstanding their differences of opinion as to the
truth or falsity of this or that particular doctrine.  Why certain
subjects of investigation have come to be grouped together and to be
regarded as falling within the province of the philosopher, rather than
certain other subjects, will, I hope, be made clear in the body of the
work.  Only an indication can be given in this chapter.

1. THE BEGINNINGS OF PHILOSOPHY.--The Greek historian Herodotus
(484-424 B.C.) appears to have been the first to use the verb "to
philosophize."  He makes Croesus tell Solon how he has heard that he
"from a desire of knowledge has, philosophizing, journeyed through many
lands."  The word "philosophizing" seems to indicate that Solon pursued
knowledge for its own sake, and was what we call an investigator.  As
for the word "philosopher" (etymologically, a lover of wisdom), a
certain somewhat unreliable tradition traces it back to Pythagoras
(about 582-500 B.C.).  As told by Cicero, the story is that, in a
conversation with Leon, the ruler of Phlius, in the Peloponnesus, he
described himself as a philosopher, and said that his business was an
investigation into the nature of things.

At any rate, both the words "philosopher" and "philosophy" are freely
used in the writings of the disciples of Socrates (470-399 B.C.), and
it is possible that he was the first to make use of them.  The seeming
modesty of the title philosopher--for etymologically it is a modest
one, though it has managed to gather a very different signification
with the lapse of time--the modesty of the title would naturally appeal
to a man who claimed so much ignorance, as Socrates; and Plato
represents him as distinguishing between the lover of wisdom and the
wise, on the ground that God alone may be called wise.  From that date
to this the word "philosopher" has remained with us, and it has meant
many things to many men.  But for centuries the philosopher has not
been simply the investigator, nor has he been simply the lover of
wisdom.

An investigation into the origin of words, however interesting in
itself, can tell us little of the uses to which words are put after
they have come into being.  If we turn from etymology to history, and
review the labors of the men whom the world has agreed to call
philosophers, we are struck by the fact that those who head the list
chronologically appear to have been occupied with crude physical
speculations, with attempts to guess what the world is made out of,
rather than with that somewhat vague something that we call philosophy
to-day.

Students of the history of philosophy usually begin their studies with
the speculations of the Greek philosopher Thales (b. 624 B.C.).  We are
told that he assumed water to be the universal principle out of which
all things are made, and that he maintained that "all things are full
of gods."  We find that Anaximander, the next in the list, assumed as
the source out of which all things proceed and that to which they all
return "the infinite and indeterminate"; and that Anaximenes, who was
perhaps his pupil, took as his principle the all-embracing air.

This trio constitutes the Ionian school of philosophy, the earliest of
the Greek schools; and one who reads for the first time the few vague
statements which seem to constitute the sum of their contributions to
human knowledge is impelled to wonder that so much has been made of the
men.

This wonder disappears, however, when one realizes that the appearance
of these thinkers was really a momentous thing.  For these men turned
their faces away from the poetical and mythologic way of accounting for
things, which had obtained up to their time, and set their faces toward
Science.  Aristotle shows us how Thales may have been led to the
formulation of his main thesis by an observation of the phenomena of
nature.  Anaximander saw in the world in which he lived the result of a
process of evolution.  Anaximenes explains the coming into being of
fire, wind, clouds, water, and earth, as due to a condensation and
expansion of the universal principle, air.  The boldness of their
speculations we may explain as due to a courage born of ignorance, but
the explanations they offer are scientific in spirit, at least.

Moreover, these men do not stand alone.  They are the advance guard of
an army whose latest representatives are the men who are enlightening
the world at the present day.  The evolution of science--taking that
word in the broad sense to mean organized and systematized
knowledge--must be traced in the works of the Greek philosophers from
Thales down.  Here we have the source and the rivulet to which we can
trace back the mighty stream which is flowing past our own doors.
Apparently insignificant in its beginnings, it must still for a while
seem insignificant to the man who follows with an unreflective eye the
course of the current.

It would take me too far afield to give an account of the Greek schools
which immediately succeeded the Ionic: to tell of the Pythagoreans, who
held that all things were constituted by numbers; of the Eleatics, who
held that "only Being is," and denied the possibility of change,
thereby reducing the shifting panorama of the things about us to a mere
delusive world of appearances; of Heraclitus, who was so impressed by
the constant flux of things that he summed up his view of nature in the
words: "Everything flows"; of Empedocles, who found his explanation of
the world in the combination of the four elements, since become
traditional, earth, water, fire, and air; of Democritus, who developed
a materialistic atomism which reminds one strongly of the doctrine of
atoms as it has appeared in modern science; of Anaxagoras, who traced
the system of things to the setting in order of an infinite
multiplicity of different elements,--"seeds of things,"--which setting
in order was due to the activity of the finest of things, Mind.

It is a delight to discover the illuminating thoughts which came to the
minds of these men; and, on the other hand, it is amusing to see how
recklessly they launched themselves on boundless seas when they were
unprovided with chart and compass.  They were like brilliant children,
who know little of the dangers of the great world, but are ready to
undertake anything.  These philosophers regarded all knowledge as their
province, and did not despair of governing so great a realm.  They were
ready to explain the whole world and everything in it.  Of course, this
can only mean that they had little conception of how much there is to
explain, and of what is meant by scientific explanation.

It is characteristic of this series of philosophers that their
attention was directed very largely upon the external world.  It was
natural that this should be so.  Both in the history of the race and in
that of the individual, we find that the attention is seized first by
material things, and that it is long before a clear conception of the
mind and of its knowledge is arrived at.  Observation precedes
reflection.  When we come to think definitely about the mind, we are
all apt to make use of notions which we have derived from our
experience of external things.  The very words we use to denote mental
operations are in many instances taken from this outer realm.  We
"direct" the attention; we speak of "apprehension," of "conception," of
"intuition."  Our knowledge is "clear" or "obscure"; an oration is
"brilliant"; an emotion is "sweet" or "bitter."  What wonder that, as
we read over the fragments that have come down to us from the
Pre-Socratic philosophers, we should be struck by the fact that they
sometimes leave out altogether and sometimes touch lightly upon a
number of those things that we regard to-day as peculiarly within the
province of the philosopher.  They busied themselves with the world as
they saw it, and certain things had hardly as yet come definitely
within their horizon.

2. THE GREEK PHILOSOPHY AT ITS HEIGHT.--The next succeeding period sees
certain classes of questions emerge into prominence which had attracted
comparatively little attention from the men of an earlier day.
Democritus of Abdera, to whom reference has been made above, belongs
chronologically to this latter period, but his way of thinking makes us
class him with the earlier philosophers.  It was characteristic of
these latter that they assumed rather naïvely that man can look upon
the world and can know it, and can by thinking about it succeed in
giving a reasonable account of it.  That there may be a difference
between the world as it really is and the world as it appears to man,
and that it may be impossible for man to attain to a knowledge of the
absolute truth of things, does not seem to have occurred to them.

The fifth century before Christ was, in Greece, a time of intense
intellectual ferment.  One is reminded, in reading of it, of the
splendid years of the Renaissance in Italy, of the awakening of the
human mind to a vigorous life which cast off the bonds of tradition and
insisted upon the right of free and unfettered development.  Athens was
the center of this intellectual activity.

In this century arose the Sophists, public teachers who busied
themselves with all departments of human knowledge, but seemed to lay
no little emphasis upon certain questions that touched very nearly the
life of man.  Can man attain to truth at all--to a truth that is more
than a mere truth to him, a seeming truth?  Whence do the laws derive
their authority?  Is there such a thing as justice, as right?  It was
with such questions as these that the Sophists occupied themselves, and
such questions as these have held the attention of mankind ever since.
When they make their appearance in the life of a people or of an
individual man, it means that there has been a rebirth, a birth into
the life of reflection.

When Socrates, that greatest of teachers, felt called upon to refute
the arguments of these men, he met them, so to speak, on their own
ground, recognizing that the subjects of which they discoursed were,
indeed, matter for scientific investigation.  His attitude seemed to
many conservative persons in his day a dangerous one; he was regarded
as an innovator; he taught men to think and to raise questions where,
before, the traditions of the fathers had seemed a sufficient guide to
men's actions.

And, indeed, he could not do otherwise.  Men had learned to reflect,
and there had come into existence at least the beginnings of what we
now sometimes rather loosely call the mental and moral sciences.  In
the works of Socrates' disciple Plato (428-347 B.C.) and in those of
Plato's disciple Aristotle (384-322 B.C.), abundant justice is done to
these fields of human activity.  These two, the greatest among the
Greek philosophers, differ from each other in many things, but it is
worthy of remark that they both seem to regard the whole sphere of
human knowledge as their province.

Plato is much more interested in the moral sciences than in the
physical, but he, nevertheless, feels called upon to give an account of
how the world was made and out of what sort of elements.  He evidently
does not take his own account very seriously, and recognizes that he is
on uncertain ground.  But he does not consider the matter beyond his
jurisdiction.

As for Aristotle, that wonderful man seems to have found it possible to
represent worthily every science known to his time, and to have marked
out several new fields for his successors to cultivate.  His philosophy
covers physics, cosmology, zoölogy, logic, metaphysics, ethics,
psychology, politics and economics, rhetoric and poetics.

Thus we see that the task of the philosopher was much the same at the
period of the highest development of the Greek philosophy that it had
been earlier.  He was supposed to give an account of the system of
things.  But the notion of what it means to give an account of the
system of things had necessarily undergone some change.  The
philosopher had to be something more than a natural philosopher.

3. PHILOSOPHY AS A GUIDE TO LIFE.--At the close of the fourth century
before Christ there arose the schools of the Stoics, the Epicureans,
and the Skeptics.  In them we seem to find a somewhat new conception of
philosophy--philosophy appears as chiefly a guide to life.  The Stoic
emphasizes the necessity of living "according to nature," and dwells
upon the character of the wise man; the Epicurean furnishes certain
selfish maxims for getting through life as pleasantly as possible; the
Skeptic counsels apathy, an indifference to all things,--blessed is he
who expects nothing, for he shall not be disappointed.

And yet, when we examine more closely these systems, we find a
conception of philosophy not really so very different from that which
had obtained before.  We do not find, it is true, that disinterested
passion for the attainment of truth which is the glory of science.  Man
seems quite too much concerned with the problem of his own happiness or
unhappiness; he has grown morbid.  Nevertheless, the practical maxims
which obtain in each of these systems are based upon a certain view of
the system of things as a whole.

The Stoic tells us of what the world consists; what was the beginning
and what will be the end of things; what is the relation of the system
of things to God.  He develops a physics and a logic as well as a
system of ethics.  The Epicurean informs us that the world originated
in a rain of atoms through space; he examines into the foundations of
human knowledge; and he proceeds to make himself comfortable in a world
from which he has removed those disturbing elements, the gods.  The
Skeptic decides that there is no such thing as truth, before he
enunciates the dogma that it is not worth while to worry about
anything.  The philosophy of each school includes a view of the system
of things as a whole.  The philosopher still regarded the universe of
knowledge as his province.

4. PHILOSOPHY IN THE MIDDLE AGES.--I cannot do more than mention
Neo-Platonism, that half Greek and half Oriental system of doctrine
which arose in the third century after Christ, the first system of
importance after the schools mentioned above.  But I must not pass it
by without pointing out that the Neo-Platonic philosopher undertook to
give an account of the origin, development, and end of the whole system
of things.

In the Middle Ages there gradually grew up rather a sharp distinction
between those things that can be known through the unaided reason and
those things that can only be known through a supernatural revelation.
The term "philosophy" came to be synonymous with knowledge attained by
the natural light of reason.  This seems to imply some sort of a
limitation to the task of the philosopher.  Philosophy is not
synonymous with all knowledge.

But we must not forget to take note of the fact that philosophy, even
with this limitation, constitutes a pretty wide field.  It covers both
the physical and the moral sciences.  Nor should we omit to notice that
the scholastic philosopher was at the same time a theologian.  Albert
the Great and St. Thomas Aquinas, the famous scholastics of the
thirteenth century, had to write a "_Summa Theologiae_," or system of
theology, as well as to treat of the other departments of human
knowledge.

Why were these men not overwhelmed with the task set them by the
tradition of their time?  It was because the task was not, after all,
so great as a modern man might conceive it to be.  Gil Blas, in Le
Sage's famous romance, finds it possible to become a skilled physician
in the twinkling of an eye, when Dr. Sangrado has imparted to him the
secret that the remedy for all diseases is to be found in bleeding the
patient and in making him drink copiously of hot water.  When little is
known about things, it does not seem impossible for one man to learn
that little.  During the Middle Ages and the centuries preceding, the
physical sciences had a long sleep.  Men were much more concerned in
the thirteenth century to find out what Aristotle had said than they
were to address questions to nature.  The special sciences, as we now
know them, had not been called into existence.

5. THE MODERN PHILOSOPHY.--The submission of men's minds to the
authority of Aristotle and of the church gradually gave way.  A revival
of learning set in.  Men turned first of all to a more independent
choice of authorities, and then rose to the conception of a philosophy
independent of authority, of a science based upon an observation of
nature, of a science at first hand.  The special sciences came into
being.

But the old tradition of philosophy as universal knowledge remained.
If we pass over the men of the transition period and turn our attention
to Francis Bacon (1561-1626) and Rene Descartes (1596-1650), the two
who are commonly regarded as heading the list of the modern
philosophers, we find both of them assigning to the philosopher an
almost unlimited field.

Bacon holds that philosophy has for its objects God, man, and nature,
and he regards it as within his province to treat of "_philosophia
prima_" (a sort of metaphysics, though he does not call it by this
name), of logic, of physics and astronomy, of anthropology, in which he
includes psychology, of ethics, and of politics.  In short, he attempts
to map out the whole field of human knowledge, and to tell those who
work in this corner of it or in that how they should set about their
task.

As for Descartes, he writes of the trustworthiness of human knowledge,
of the existence of God, of the existence of an external world, of the
human soul and its nature, of mathematics, physics, cosmology,
physiology, and, in short, of nearly everything discussed by the men of
his day.  No man can accuse this extraordinary Frenchman of a lack of
appreciation of the special sciences which were growing up.  No one in
his time had a better right to be called a scientist in the modern
sense of the term.  But it was not enough for him to be a mere
mathematician, or even a worker in the physical sciences generally.  He
must be all that has been mentioned above.

The conception of philosophy as of a something that embraces all
departments of human knowledge has not wholly passed away even in our
day.  I shall not dwell upon Spinoza (1632-1677), who believed it
possible to deduce a world _a priori_ with mathematical precision; upon
Christian Wolff (1679-1754), who defined philosophy as the knowledge of
the causes of what is or comes into being; upon Fichte (1762-1814), who
believed that the philosopher, by mere thinking, could lay down the
laws of all possible future experience; upon Schelling (1775-1854),
who, without knowing anything worth mentioning about natural science,
had the courage to develop a system of natural philosophy, and to
condemn such investigators as Boyle and Newton; upon Hegel (1770-1831),
who undertakes to construct the whole system of reality out of
concepts, and who, with his immediate predecessors, brought philosophy
for a while into more or less disrepute with men of a scientific turn
of mind.  I shall come down quite to our own times, and consider a man
whose conception of philosophy has had and still has a good deal of
influence, especially with the general public--with those to whom
philosophy is a thing to be taken up in moments of leisure, and cannot
be the serious pursuit of a life.

"Knowledge of the lowest kind," says Herbert Spencer, "is _un-unified_
knowledge; Science is _partially-unified_ knowledge; Philosophy is
_completely-unified_ knowledge." [1]  Science, he argues, means merely
the family of the Sciences--stands for nothing more than the sum of
knowledge formed of their contributions.  Philosophy is the fusion of
these contributions into a whole; it is knowledge of the greatest
generality.  In harmony with this notion Spencer produced a system of
philosophy which includes the following: A volume entitled "First
Principles," which undertakes to show what man can and what man cannot
know; a treatise on the principles of biology; another on the
principles of psychology; still another on the principles of sociology;
and finally one on the principles of morality.  To complete the scheme
it would have been necessary to give an account of inorganic nature
before going on to the phenomena of life, but our philosopher found the
task too great and left this out.

Now, Spencer was a man of genius, and one finds in his works many
illuminating thoughts.  But it is worthy of remark that those who
praise his work in this or in that field are almost always men who have
themselves worked in some other field and have an imperfect
acquaintance with the particular field that they happen to be praising.
The metaphysician finds the reasonings of the "First Principles" rather
loose and inconclusive; the biologist pays little heed to the
"Principles of Biology"; the sociologist finds Spencer not particularly
accurate or careful in the field of his predilection.  He has tried to
be a professor of all the sciences, and it is too late in the world's
history for him or for any man to cope with such a task.  In the days
of Plato a man might have hoped to accomplish it.

6. WHAT PHILOSOPHY MEANS IN OUR TIME.--It savors of temerity to write
down such a title as that which heads the present section.  There are
men living to-day to whom philosophy means little else than the
doctrine of Kant, or of Hegel, or of the brothers Caird, or of Herbert
Spencer, or even of St. Thomas Aquinas, for we must not forget that
many of the seminaries of learning in Europe and some in America still
hold to the mediaeval church philosophy.

But let me gather up in a few words the purport of what has been said
above.  Philosophy once meant the whole body of scientific knowledge.
Afterward it came to mean the whole body of knowledge which could be
attained by the mere light of human reason, unaided by revelation.  The
several special sciences sprang up, and a multitude of men have for a
long time past devoted themselves to definite limited fields of
investigation with little attention to what has been done in other
fields.  Nevertheless, there has persisted the notion of a discipline
which somehow concerns itself with the whole system of things, rather
than with any limited division of that broad field.  It is a notion not
peculiar to the disciples of Spencer.  There are many to whom
philosophy is a "_Weltweisheit_," a world-wisdom.  Shall we say that
this is the meaning of the word philosophy now?  And if we do, how
shall we draw a line between philosophy and the body of the special
sciences?

Perhaps the most just way to get a preliminary idea of what philosophy
means to the men of our time is to turn away for the time being from
the definition of any one man or group of men, and to ask ourselves
what a professor of philosophy in an American or European university is
actually supposed to teach.

It is quite clear that he is not supposed to be an Aristotle.  He does
not represent all the sciences, and no one expects him to lecture on
mathematics, mechanics, physics, chemistry, zoölogy, botany, economics,
politics, and various other disciplines.  There was a time when he
might have been expected to teach all that men could know, but that
time is long past.

Nevertheless, there is quite a group of sciences which are regarded as
belonging especially to his province; and although a man may devote a
large part of his attention to some one portion of the field, he would
certainly be thought remiss if he wholly neglected the rest.  This
group of sciences includes logic, psychology, ethics and aesthetics,
metaphysics, and the history of philosophy.  I have not included
epistemology or the "theory of knowledge" as a separate discipline, for
reasons which will appear later (Chapter XIX); and I have included the
history of philosophy, because, whether we care to call this a special
science or not, it constitutes a very important part of the work of the
teacher of philosophy in our day.

Of this group of subjects the student who goes to the university to
study philosophy is supposed to know something before he leaves its
walls, whatever else he may or may not know.

It should be remarked, again, that there is commonly supposed to be a
peculiarly close relation between philosophy and religion.  Certainly,
if any one about a university undertakes to give a course of lectures
on theism, it is much more apt to be the professor of philosophy than
the professor of mathematics or of chemistry.  The man who has written
an "Introduction to Philosophy," a "Psychology," a "Logic," and an
"Outlines of Metaphysics" is very apt to regard it as his duty to add
to the list a "Philosophy of Religion."  The students in the
theological seminaries of Europe and America are usually encouraged, if
not compelled, to attend courses in philosophy.

Finally, it appears to be definitely accepted that even the disciplines
that we never think of classing among the philosophical sciences are
not wholly cut off from a connection with philosophy.  When we are
occupied, not with adding to the stock of knowledge embraced within the
sphere of any special science, but with an examination of the methods
of the science, with, so to speak, a criticism of the foundations upon
which the science rests, our work is generally recognized as
philosophical.  It strikes no one as odd in our day that there should
be established a "Journal of Philosophy, Psychology, and Scientific
Methods," but we should think it strange if some one announced the
intention to publish a "Journal of Philosophy and Comparative Anatomy."
It is not without its significance that, when Mach, who had been
professor of physics at Prague, was called (in 1895) to the University
of Vienna to lecture on the history and theory of the inductive
sciences, he was made, not professor of physics, but professor of
philosophy.

The case, then, stands thus: a certain group of disciplines is regarded
as falling peculiarly within the province of the professor of
philosophy, and the sciences which constitute it are frequently called
the philosophical sciences; moreover, it is regarded as quite proper
that the teacher of philosophy should concern himself with the problems
of religion, and should pry into the methods and fundamental
assumptions of special sciences in all of which it is impossible that
he should be an adept.  The question naturally arises: Why has his task
come to be circumscribed as it is?  Why should he teach just these
things and no others?

To this question certain persons are at once ready to give an answer.
There was a time, they argue, when it seemed possible for one man to
embrace the whole field of human knowledge.  But human knowledge grew;
the special sciences were born; each concerned itself with a definite
class of facts and developed its own methods.  It became possible and
necessary for a man to be, not a scientist at large, but a chemist, a
physicist, a biologist, an economist.  But in certain portions of the
great field men have met with peculiar difficulties; here it cannot be
said that we have sciences, but rather that we have attempts at
science.  The philosopher is the man to whom is committed what is left
when we have taken away what has been definitely established or is
undergoing investigation according to approved scientific methods.  He
is Lord of the Uncleared Ground, and may wander through it in his
compassless, irresponsible way, never feeling that he is lost, for he
has never had any definite bearings to lose.

Those who argue in this way support their case by pointing to the lack
of a general consensus of opinion which obtains in many parts of the
field which the philosopher regards as his own; and also by pointing
out that, even within this field, there is a growing tendency on the
part of certain sciences to separate themselves from philosophy and
become independent.  Thus the psychologist and the logician are
sometimes very anxious to have it understood that they belong among the
scientists and not among the philosophers.

Now, this answer to the question that we have raised undoubtedly
contains some truth.  As we have seen from the sketch contained in the
preceding pages, the word philosophy was once a synonym for the whole
sum of the sciences or what stood for such; gradually the several
sciences have become independent and the field of the philosopher has
been circumscribed.  We must admit, moreover, that there is to be found
in a number of the special sciences a body of accepted facts which is
without its analogue in philosophy.  In much of his work the
philosopher certainly seems to be walking upon more uncertain ground
than his neighbors; and if he is unaware of that fact, it must be
either because he has not a very nice sense of what constitutes
scientific evidence, or because he is carried away by his enthusiasm
for some particular form of doctrine.

Nevertheless, it is just to maintain that the answer we are discussing
is not a satisfactory one.  For one thing, we find in it no indication
of the reason why the particular group of disciplines with which the
philosopher occupies himself has been left to him, when so many
sciences have announced their independence.  Why have not these, also,
separated off and set up for themselves?  Is it more difficult to work
in these fields than in others? and, if so, what reason can be assigned
for the fact?

Take psychology as an instance.  How does it happen that the physicist
calmly develops his doctrine without finding it necessary to make his
bow to philosophy at all, while the psychologist is at pains to explain
that his book is to treat psychology as "a natural science," and will
avoid metaphysics as much as possible?  For centuries men have been
interested in the phenomena of the human mind.  Can anything be more
open to observation than what passes in a man's own consciousness?
Why, then, should the science of psychology lag behind? and why these
endless disputes as to whether it can really be treated as a "natural
science" at all?

Again.  May we assume that, because certain disciplines have taken a
position of relative independence, therefore all the rest of the field
will surely come to be divided up in the same way, and that there will
be many special sciences, but no such thing as philosophy?  It is hasty
to assume this on no better evidence than that which has so far been
presented.  Before making up one's mind upon this point, one should
take a careful look at the problems with which the philosopher occupies
himself.

A complete answer to the questions raised above can only be given in
the course of the book, where the main problems of philosophy are
discussed, and the several philosophical sciences are taken up and
examined.  But I may say, in anticipation, as much as this:--

(1) Philosophy is reflective knowledge.  What is meant by reflective
knowledge will be explained at length in the next chapter.

(2) The sciences which are grouped together as philosophical are those
in which we are forced back upon the problems of reflective thought,
and cannot simply put them aside.

(3) The peculiar difficulties of reflective thought may account for the
fact that these sciences are, more than others, a field in which we may
expect to find disputes and differences of opinion.

(4) We need not be afraid that the whole field of human knowledge will
come to be so divided up into special sciences that philosophy will
disappear.  The problems with which the philosopher occupies himself
are real problems, which present themselves unavoidably to the
thoughtful mind, and it is not convenient to divide these up among the
several sciences.  This will become clearer as we proceed.


[1] "First Principles," Part II, section 37.




CHAPTER II

COMMON THOUGHT, SCIENCE, AND REFLECTIVE THOUGHT

7. COMMON THOUGHT.--Those who have given little attention to the study
of the human mind are apt to suppose that, when the infant opens its
eyes upon the new world of objects surrounding its small body, it sees
things much as they do themselves.  They are ready to admit that it
does not know much _about_ things, but it strikes them as absurd for
any one to go so far as to say that it does not see things--the things
out there in space before its eyes.

Nevertheless, the psychologist tells us that it requires quite a course
of education to enable us to see things--not to have vague and
unmeaning sensations, but to see things, things that are known to be
touchable as well as seeable, things that are recognized as having size
and shape and position in space.  And he aims a still severer blow at
our respect for the infant when he goes on to inform us that the little
creature is as ignorant of itself as it is of things; that in its small
world of as yet unorganized experiences there is no self that is
distinguished from other things; that it may cry vociferously without
knowing who is uncomfortable, and may stop its noise without knowing
who has been taken up into the nurse's arms and has experienced an
agreeable change.

This chaotic little world of the dawning life is not our world, the
world of common thought, the world in which we all live and move in
maturer years; nor can we go back to it on the wings of memory.  We
seem to ourselves to have always lived in a world of things,--things in
time and space, material things.  Among these things there is one of
peculiar interest, and which we have not placed upon a par with the
rest, our own body, which sees, tastes, touches, other things.  We
cannot remember a time when we did not know that with this body are
somehow bound up many experiences which interest us acutely; for
example, experiences of pleasure and pain.  Moreover, we seem always to
have known that certain of the bodies which surround our own rather
resemble our own, and are in important particulars to be distinguished
from the general mass of bodies.

Thus, we seem always to have been living in a world of _things_ and to
have recognized in that world the existence of ourselves and of other
people.  When we now think of "ourselves" and of "other people," we
think of each of the objects referred to as possessing a _mind_.  May
we say that, as far back as we can remember, we have thought of
ourselves and of other persons as possessing minds?

Hardly.  The young child does not seem to distinguish between mind and
body, and, in the vague and fragmentary pictures which come back to us
from our early life, certainly this distinction does not stand out.
The child may be the completest of egoists, it may be absorbed in
itself and all that directly concerns this particular self, and yet it
may make no conscious distinction between a bodily self and a mental,
between mind and body.  It does not explicitly recognize its world as a
world that contains minds as well as bodies.

But, however it may be with the child in the earlier stages of its
development, we must all admit that the mature man does consciously
recognize that the world in which he finds himself is a world that
contains minds as well as bodies.  It never occurs to him to doubt that
there are bodies, and it never occurs to him to doubt that there are
minds.

Does he not perceive that he has a body and a mind?  Has he not
abundant evidence that his mind is intimately related to his body?
When he shuts his eyes, he no longer sees, and when he stops his ears,
he no longer hears; when his body is bruised, he feels pain; when he
wills to raise his hand, his body carries out the mental decree.  Other
men act very much as he does; they walk and they talk, they laugh and
they cry, they work and they play, just as he does.  In short, they act
precisely as though they had minds like his own.  What more natural
than to assume that, as he himself gives expression, by the actions of
his body, to the thoughts and emotions in his mind, so his neighbor
does the same?

We must not allow ourselves to underrate the plain man's knowledge
either of bodies or of minds.  It seems, when one reflects upon it, a
sufficiently wonderful thing that a few fragmentary sensations should
automatically receive an interpretation which conjures up before the
mind a world of real things; that, for example, the little patch of
color sensation which I experience when I turn my eyes toward the
window should seem to introduce me at once to a world of material
objects lying in space, clearly defined in magnitude, distance, and
direction; that an experience no more complex should be the key which
should unlock for me the secret storehouse of another mind, and lay
before me a wealth of thoughts and emotions not my own.  From the poor,
bare, meaningless world of the dawning intelligence to the world of
common thought, a world in which real things with their manifold
properties, things material and things mental, bear their part, is
indeed a long step.

And we should never forget that he who would go farther, he who would
strive to gain a better knowledge of matter and of mind by the aid of
science and of philosophical reflection, must begin his labors on this
foundation which is common to us all.  How else can he begin than by
accepting and more critically examining the world as it seems revealed
in the experience of the race?

8. SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE.--Still, the knowledge of the world which we
have been discussing is rather indefinite, inaccurate, and
unsystematic.  It is a sufficient guide for common life, but its
deficiencies may be made apparent.  He who wishes to know matter and
mind better cannot afford to neglect the sciences.

Now, it is important to observe that although, when the plain man grows
scientific, great changes take place in his knowledge of things, yet
his way of looking at the mind and the world remains in general much
what it was before.  To prevent this statement from being
misunderstood, I must explain it at some length.

Let us suppose that the man in question takes up the study of botany.
Need he do anything very different from what is done more imperfectly
by every intelligent man who interests himself in plants?  There in the
real material world before him are the same plants that he observed
somewhat carelessly before.  He must collect his information more
systematically and must arrange it more critically, but his task is not
so much to do something different as it is to do the same thing much
better.

The same is evidently true of various other sciences, such as geology,
zoölogy, physiology, sociology.  Some men have much accurate
information regarding rocks, animals, the functions of the bodily
organs, the development of a given form of society, and other things of
the sort, and other men have but little; and yet it is usually not
difficult for the man who knows much to make the man who knows little
understand, at least, what he is talking about.  He is busying himself
with _things_--the same things that interest the plain man, and of
which the plain man knows something.  He has collected information
touching their properties, their changes, their relationships; but to
him, as to his less scientific neighbor, they are the same things they
always were,--things that he has known from the days of childhood.

Perhaps it will be admitted that this is true of such sciences as those
above indicated, but doubted whether it is true of all the sciences,
even of all the sciences which are directly concerned with _things_ of
_some_ sort.  For example, to the plain man the world of material
things consists of things that can be seen and touched.  Many of these
seem to fill space continuously.  They may be divided, but the parts
into which they may be divided are conceived as fragments of the
things, and as of the same general nature as the wholes of which they
are parts.  Yet the chemist and the physicist tell us that these same
extended things are not really continuous, as they seem to us to be,
but consist of swarms of imperceptible atoms, in rapid motion, at
considerable distances from one another in space, and grouped in
various ways.

What has now become of the world of realities to which the plain man
pinned his faith?  It has come to be looked upon as a world of
appearances, of phenomena, of manifestations, under which the real
things, themselves imperceptible, make their presence evident to our
senses.  Is this new, real world the world of things in which the plain
man finds himself, and in which he has felt so much at home?

A closer scrutiny reveals that the world of atoms and molecules into
which the man of science resolves the system of material things is not,
after all, so very different in kind from the world to which the plain
man is accustomed.  He can understand without difficulty the language
in which it is described to him, and he can readily see how a man may
be led to assume its existence.

The atom is not, it is true, directly perceivable by sense, but it is
conceived as though it and its motions were thus perceivable.  The
plain man has long known that things consist of parts which remain,
under some circumstances, invisible.  When he approaches an object from
a distance, he sees parts which he could not see before; and what
appears to the naked eye a mere speck without perceptible parts is
found under the microscope to be an insect with its full complement of
members.  Moreover, he has often observed that objects which appear
continuous when seen from a distance are evidently far from continuous
when seen close at hand.  As we walk toward a tree we can see the
indefinite mass of color break up into discontinuous patches; a fabric,
which presents the appearance of an unbroken surface when viewed in
certain ways may be seen to be riddled with holes when held between the
eye and the light.  There is no man who has not some acquaintance with
the distinction between appearance and reality, and who does not make
use of the distinction in common life.

Nor can it seem a surprising fact that different combinations of atoms
should exhibit different properties.  Have we not always known that
things in combination are apt to have different properties from the
same things taken separately?  He who does not know so much as this is
not fit even to be a cook.

No, the imperceptible world of atoms and molecules is not by any means
totally different from the world of things in which the plain man
lives.  These little objects and groups of objects are discussed very
much as we discuss the larger objects and groups of objects to which we
are accustomed.  We are still concerned with _things_ which exist in
space and move about in space; and even if these things are small and
are not very familiarly known, no intellectual revolution is demanded
to enable a man to understand the words of the scientist who is talking
about them, and to understand as well the sort of reasonings upon which
the doctrine is based.

9. MATHEMATICS.--Let us now turn to take a glance at the mathematical
sciences.  Of course, these have to do with things sooner or later, for
our mathematical reasonings would be absolutely useless to us if they
could not be applied to the world of things; but in mathematical
reasonings we abstract from things for the time being, confident that
we can come back to them when we want to do so, and can make use of the
results obtained in our operations.

Now, every civilized man who is not mentally deficient can perform the
fundamental operations of arithmetic.  He can add and subtract,
multiply and divide.  In other words, he can use _numbers_.  The man
who has become an accomplished mathematician can use numbers much
better; but if we are capable of following intelligently the intricate
series of operations that he carries out on the paper before us, and
can see the significance of the system of signs which he uses as an
aid, we shall realize that he is only doing in more complicated ways
what we have been accustomed to do almost from our childhood.

If we are interested, not so much in performing the operations, as in
inquiring into what really takes place in a mind when several units are
grasped together and made into a new unit,--for example, when twelve
units are thought as one dozen,--the mathematician has a right to say:
I leave all that to the psychologist or to the metaphysician; every one
knows in a general way what is meant by a unit, and knows that units
can be added and subtracted, grouped and separated; I only undertake to
show how one may avoid error in doing these things.

It is with geometry as it is with arithmetic.  No man is wholly
ignorant of points, lines, surfaces, and solids.  We are all aware that
a short line is not a point, a narrow surface is not a line, and a thin
solid is not a mere surface.  A door so thin as to have only one side
would be repudiated by every man of sense as a monstrosity.  When the
geometrician defines for us the point, the line, the surface, and the
solid, and when he sets before us an array of axioms, or self-evident
truths, we follow him with confidence because he seems to be telling us
things that we can directly see to be reasonable; indeed, to be telling
us things that we have always known.

The truth is that the geometrician does not introduce us to a new world
at all.  He merely gives us a fuller and a more exact account than was
before within our reach of the space relations which obtain in the
world of external objects, a world we already know pretty well.

Suppose that we say to him: You have spent many years in dividing up
space and in scrutinizing the relations that are to be discovered in
that realm; now tell us, what is space?  Is it real?  Is it a thing, or
a quality of a thing, or merely a relation between things?  And how can
any man think space, when the ideas through which he must think it are
supposed to be themselves non-extended?  The space itself is not
supposed to be in the mind; how can a collection of non-extended ideas
give any inkling of what is meant by extension?

Would any teacher of mathematics dream of discussing these questions
with his class before proceeding to the proof of his propositions?  It
is generally admitted that, if such questions are to be answered at
all, it is not with the aid of geometrical reasonings that they will be
answered.

10. THE SCIENCE OF PSYCHOLOGY.--Now let us come back to a science which
has to do directly with things.  We have seen that the plain man has
some knowledge of minds as well as of material things.  Every one
admits that the psychologist knows minds better.  May we say that his
knowledge of minds differs from that of the plain man about as the
knowledge of plants possessed by the botanist differs from that of all
intelligent persons who have cared to notice them?  Or is it a
knowledge of a quite different kind?

Those who are familiar with the development of the sciences within
recent years have had occasion to remark the fact that psychology has
been coming more and more to take its place as an independent science.
Formerly it was regarded as part of the duty of the philosopher to
treat of the mind and its knowledge; but the psychologist who pretends
to be no more than a psychologist is a product of recent times.  This
tendency toward specialization is a natural thing, and is quite in line
with what has taken place in other fields of investigation.

When any science becomes an independent discipline, it is recognized
that it is a more or less limited field in which work of a certain kind
is done in a certain way.  Other fields and other kinds of work are to
some extent ignored.  But it is quite to be expected that there should
be some dispute, especially at first, as to what does or does not
properly fall within the limits of a given science.  Where these limits
shall be placed is, after all, a matter of convenience; and sometimes
it is not well to be too strict in marking off one field from another.
It is well to watch the actual development of a science, and to note
the direction instinctively taken by investigators in that particular
field.

If we compare the psychology of a generation or so ago with that of the
present day, we cannot but be struck with the fact that there is an
increasing tendency to treat psychology as a _natural science_.  By
this is not meant, of course, that there is no difference between
psychology and the sciences that concern themselves with the world of
material things--psychology has to do primarily with minds and not with
bodies.  But it is meant that, as the other sciences improve upon the
knowledge of the plain man without wholly recasting it, as they accept
the world in which he finds himself and merely attempt to give us a
better account of it, so the psychologist may accept the world of
matter and of minds recognized by common thought, and may devote
himself to the study of minds, without attempting to solve a class of
problems discussed by the metaphysician.  For example, he may refuse to
discuss the question whether the mind can really know that there is an
external world with which it stands in relation, and from which it
receives messages along the avenues of the senses.  He may claim that
it is no more his business to treat of this than it is the business of
the mathematician to treat of the ultimate nature of space.

Thus the psychologist assumes without question the existence of an
external real world, a world of matter and motion.  He finds in this
world certain organized bodies that present phenomena which he regards
as indicative of the presence of minds.  He accepts it as a fact that
each mind knows its own states directly, and knows everything else by
inference from those states, receiving messages from the outer world
along one set of nerves and reacting along another set.  He conceives
of minds as wholly dependent upon messages thus conveyed to them from
without.  He tells us how a mind, by the aid of such messages,
gradually builds up for itself the notion of the external world and of
the other minds which are connected with bodies to be found in that
world.

We may fairly say that all this is merely a development of and an
improvement upon the plain man's knowledge of minds and of bodies.
There is no normal man who does not know that his mind is more
intimately related to his body than it is to other bodies.  We all
distinguish between our ideas of things and the external things they
represent, and we believe that our knowledge of things comes to us
through the avenues of the senses.  Must we not open our eyes to see,
and unstop our ears to hear?  We all know that we do not perceive other
minds directly, but must infer their contents from what takes place in
the bodies to which they are referred--from words and actions.
Moreover, we know that a knowledge of the outer world and of other
minds is built up gradually, and we never think of an infant as knowing
what a man knows, much as we are inclined to overrate the minds of
infants.

The fact that the plain man and the psychologist do not greatly differ
in their point of view must impress every one who is charged with the
task of introducing students to the study of psychology and philosophy.
It is rather an easy thing to make them follow the reasonings of the
psychologist, so long as he avoids metaphysical reflections.  The
assumptions which he makes seem to them not unreasonable; and, as for
his methods of investigation, there is no one of them which they have
not already employed themselves in a more or less blundering way.  They
have had recourse to _introspection_, _i.e._ they have noticed the
phenomena of their own minds; they have made use of the _objective
method_, i.e. they have observed the signs of mind exhibited by other
persons and by the brutes; they have sometimes _experimented_--this is
done by the schoolgirl who tries to find out how best to tease her
roommate, and by the boy who covers and uncovers his ears in church to
make the preacher sing a tune.

It may not be easy to make men good psychologists, but it is certainly
not difficult to make them understand what the psychologist is doing
and to make them realize the value of his work.  He, like the workers
in the other natural sciences, takes for granted the world of the plain
man, the world of material things in space and time and of minds
related to those material things.  But when it is a question of
introducing the student to the reflections of the philosophers the case
is very different.  We seem to be enticing him into a new and a strange
world, and he is apt to be filled with suspicion and distrust.  The
most familiar things take on an unfamiliar aspect, and questions are
raised which it strikes the unreflective man as highly absurd even to
propose.  Of this world of reflective thought I shall say just a word
in what follows.

11. REFLECTIVE THOUGHT.--If we ask our neighbor to meet us somewhere at
a given hour, he has no difficulty in understanding what we have
requested him to do.  If he wishes to do so, he can be on the spot at
the proper moment.  He may never have asked himself in his whole life
what he means by space and by time.  He may be quite ignorant that
thoughtful men have disputed concerning the nature of these for
centuries past.

And a man may go through the world avoiding disaster year after year by
distinguishing with some success between what is real and what is not
real, and yet he may be quite unable to tell us what, in general, it
means for a thing to be real.  Some things are real and some are not;
as a rule he seems to be able to discover the difference; of his method
of procedure he has never tried to give an account to himself.

That he has a mind he cannot doubt, and he has some idea of the
difference between it and certain other minds; but even the most ardent
champion of the plain man must admit that he has the most hazy of
notions touching the nature of his mind.  He seems to be more doubtful
concerning the nature of the mind and its knowledge than he is
concerning the nature of external things.  Certainly he appears to be
more willing to admit his ignorance in this realm.

And yet the man can hold his own in the world of real things.  He can
distinguish between this thing and that, this place and that, this time
and that.  He can think out a plan and carry it into execution; he can
guess at the contents of other minds and allow this knowledge to find
its place in his plan.

All of which proves that our knowledge is not necessarily useless
because it is rather dim and vague.  It is one thing to use a mental
state; it is another to have a clear comprehension of just what it is
and of what elements it may be made up.  The plain man does much of his
thinking as we all tie our shoes and button our buttons.  It would be
difficult for us to describe these operations, but we may perform them
very easily nevertheless.  When we say that we _know_ how to tie our
shoes, we only mean that we can tie them.

Now, enough has been said in the preceding sections to make clear that
the vagueness which characterizes many notions which constantly recur
in common thought is not wholly dispelled by the study of the several
sciences.  The man of science, like the plain man, may be able to use
very well for certain purposes concepts which he is not able to analyze
satisfactorily.  For example, he speaks of space and time, cause and
effect, substance and qualities, matter and mind, reality and
unreality.  He certainly is in a position to add to our knowledge of
the things covered by these terms.  But we should never overlook the
fact that the new knowledge which he gives us is a knowledge of the
same kind as that which we had before.  He measures for us spaces and
times; he does not tell us what space and time are.  He points out the
causes of a multitude of occurrences; he does not tell us what we mean
whenever we use the word "cause."  He informs us what we should accept
as real and what we should repudiate as unreal; he does not try to show
us what it is to be real and what it is to be unreal.

In other words, the man of science _extends_ our knowledge and makes it
more accurate; he does not _analyze_ certain fundamental conceptions,
which we all use, but of which we can usually give a very poor account.

On the other hand, it is the task of _reflective thought_, not in the
first instance, to extend the limits of our knowledge of the world of
matter and of minds, but rather _to make us more clearly conscious of
what that knowledge really is_.  Philosophical reflection takes up and
tries to analyze complex thoughts that men use daily without caring to
analyze them, indeed, without even realizing that they may be subjected
to analysis.

It is to be expected that it should impress many of those who are
introduced to it for the first time as rather a fantastic creation of
problems that do not present themselves naturally to the healthy mind.
There is no thoughtful man who does not reflect sometimes and about
some things; but there are few who feel impelled to go over the whole
edifice of their knowledge and examine it with a critical eye from its
turrets to its foundations.  In a sense, we may say that philosophical
thought is not natural, for he who is examining the assumptions upon
which all our ordinary thought about the world rests is no longer in
the world of the plain man.  He is treating things as men do not
commonly treat them, and it is perhaps natural that it should appear to
some that, in the solvent which he uses, the real world in which we all
rejoice should seem to dissolve and disappear.

I have said that it is not the task of reflective thought, _in the
first instance_, to extend the limits of our knowledge of the world of
matter and of minds.  This is true.  But this does not mean that, as a
result of a careful reflective analysis, some errors which may creep
into the thought both of the plain man and of the scientist may not be
exploded; nor does it mean that some new extensions of our knowledge
may not be suggested.

In the chapters to follow I shall take up and examine some of the
problems of reflective thought.  And I shall consider first those
problems that present themselves to those who try to subject to a
careful scrutiny our knowledge of the external world.  It is well to
begin with this, for, even in our common experience, it seems to be
revealed that the knowledge of material things is a something less
vague and indefinite than the knowledge of minds.




II.  PROBLEMS TOUCHING THE EXTERNAL WORLD


CHAPTER III

IS THERE AN EXTERNAL WORLD?

12. HOW THE PLAIN MAN THINKS HE KNOWS THE WORLD.--As schoolboys we
enjoyed Cicero's joke at the expense of the "minute philosophers."
They denied the immortality of the soul; he affirmed it; and he
congratulated himself upon the fact that, if they were right, they
would not survive to discover it and to triumph over him.

At the close of the seventeenth century the philosopher John Locke was
guilty of a joke of somewhat the same kind.  "I think," said he,
"nobody can, in earnest, be so skeptical as to be uncertain of the
existence of those things which he sees and feels.  At least, he that
can doubt so far (whatever he may have with his own thoughts) will
never have any controversy with me; since he can never be sure I say
anything contrary to his own opinion."

Now, in this chapter and in certain chapters to follow, I am going to
take up and turn over, so that we may get a good look at them, some of
the problems that have presented themselves to those who have reflected
upon the world and the mind as they seem given in our experience.  I
shall begin by asking whether it is not possible to doubt that there is
an external world at all.

The question cannot best be answered by a jest.  It may, of course, be
absurd to maintain that there is no external world; but surely he, too,
is in an absurd position who maintains dogmatically that there is one,
and is yet quite unable to find any flaw in the reasonings of the man
who seems to be able to show that this belief has no solid foundation.
And we must not forget that the men who have thought it worth while to
raise just such questions as this, during the last twenty centuries,
have been among the most brilliant intellects of the race.  We must not
assume too hastily that they have occupied themselves with mere
trivialities.

Since, therefore, so many thoughtful men have found it worth while to
ask themselves seriously whether there is an external world, or, at
least, how we can know that there is an external world, it is not
unreasonable to expect that, by looking for it, we may find in our
common experience or in science some difficulty sufficient to suggest
the doubt which at first strikes the average man as preposterous.  In
what can such a doubt take its rise?  Let us see.

I think it is scarcely too much to say that the plain man believes that
he _does not_ directly perceive an external world, and that he, at the
same time, believes that he _does_ directly perceive one.  It is quite
possible to believe contradictory things, when one's thought of them is
somewhat vague, and when one does not consciously bring them together.

As to the first-mentioned belief.  Does not the plain man distinguish
between his ideas of things and the things themselves?  Does he not
believe that his ideas come to him through the avenues of the senses?
Is he not aware of the fact that, when a sense is disordered, the thing
as he perceives it is not like the thing "as it is"?  A blind man does
not see things when they are there; a color-blind man sees them as
others do not see them; a man suffering under certain abnormal
conditions of the nervous system sees things when they are not there at
all, _i.e._ he has hallucinations.  The thing itself, as it seems, is
not in the man's mind; it is the idea that is in the man's mind, and
that represents the thing.  Sometimes it appears to give a true account
of it; sometimes it seems to give a garbled account; sometimes it is a
false representative throughout--there is no reality behind it.  It is,
then, the _idea_ that is immediately known, and not the _thing_; the
thing is merely _inferred_ to exist.

I do not mean to say that the plain man is conscious of drawing this
conclusion.  I only maintain that it seems a natural conclusion to draw
from the facts which he recognizes, and that sometimes he seems to draw
the conclusion half-consciously.

On the other hand, we must all admit that when the plain man is not
thinking about the distinction between ideas and things, but is looking
at some material object before him, is touching it with his fingers and
turning it about to get a good look at it, it never occurs to him that
he is not directly conscious of the thing itself.

He seems to himself to perceive the thing immediately; to perceive it
_as_ it is and _where_ it is; to perceive it as a really extended
thing, out there in space before his body.  He does not think of
himself as occupied with mere images, representations of the object.
He may be willing to admit that his mind is in his head, but he cannot
think that what he sees is in his head.  Is not the object _there_?
does he not _see_ and _feel_ it?  Why doubt such evidence as this?  He
who tells him that the external world does not exist seems to be
denying what is immediately given in his experience.

The man who looks at things in this way assumes, of course, that the
external object is known directly, and is not a something merely
inferred to exist from the presence of a representative image.  May one
embrace this belief and abandon the other one?  If we elect to do this,
we appear to be in difficulties at once.  All the considerations which
made us distinguish so carefully between our ideas of things and the
things themselves crowd in upon us.  Can it be that we know things
independently of the avenues of the senses?  Would a man with different
senses know things just as we do?  How can any man suffer from an
hallucination, if things are not inferred from images, but are known
independently?

The difficulties encountered appear sufficiently serious even if we
keep to that knowledge of things which seems to be given in common
experience.  But even the plain man has heard of atoms and molecules;
and if he accepts the extension of knowledge offered him by the man of
science, he must admit that, whatever this apparently immediately
perceived external thing may be, it cannot be the external thing that
science assures him is out there in space beyond his body, and which
must be a very different sort of thing from the thing he seems to
perceive.  The thing he perceives must, then, be _appearance_; and
where can that appearance be if not in his own mind?

The man who has made no study of philosophy at all does not usually
think these things out; but surely there are interrogation marks
written up all over his experience, and he misses them only because he
does not see clearly.  By judiciously asking questions one may often
lead him either to affirm or to deny that he has an immediate knowledge
of the external world, pretty much as one pleases.  If he affirms it,
his position does not seem to be a wholly satisfactory one, as we have
seen; and if he denies it, he makes the existence of the external world
wholly a matter of inference from the presence of ideas in the mind,
and he must stand ready to justify this inference.

To many men it has seemed that the inference is not an easy one to
justify.  One may say: We could have no ideas of things, no sensations,
if real things did not exist and make an impression upon our senses.
But to this it may be answered: How is that statement to be proved?  Is
it to be proved by observing that, when things are present and affect
the senses, there come into being ideas which represent the things?
Evidently such a proof as this is out of the question, for, if it is
true that we know external things only by inference and never
immediately, then we can never prove by observation that ideas and
things are thus connected.  And if it is not to be proved by
observation, how shall it be proved?  Shall we just assume it
dogmatically and pass on to something else?  Surely there is enough in
the experience of the plain man to justify him in raising the question
whether he can certainly know that there is an external world.

13. THE PSYCHOLOGIST AND THE EXTERNAL WORLD.--We have seen just above
that the doubt regarding the existence of the world seems to have its
root in the familiar distinction between ideas and things, appearances
and the realities which they are supposed to represent.  The
psychologist has much to say about ideas; and if sharpening and making
clear this distinction has anything to do with stirring up doubts, it
is natural to suppose that they should become more insistent when one
has exchanged the ignorance of everyday life for the knowledge of the
psychologist.

Now, when the psychologist asks how a given mind comes to have a
knowledge of any external thing, he finds his answer in the messages
which have been brought to the mind by means of the bodily senses.  He
describes the sense-organs and the nervous connections between these
and the brain, and tells us that when certain nervous impulses have
traveled, let us say, from the eye or the ear to the brain, one has
sensations of sight or sound.

He describes for us in detail how, out of such sensations and the
memories of such sensations, we frame mental images of external things.
Between the mental image and the thing that it represents he
distinguishes sharply, and he informs us that the mind knows no more
about the external thing than is contained in such images.  That a
thing is present can be known only by the fact that a message from the
thing is sent along the nerves, and what the thing is must be
determined from the character of the message.  Given the image in the
absence of the thing,--that is to say, an hallucination,--the mind will
naturally suppose that the thing is present.  This false supposition
cannot be corrected by a direct inspection of the thing, for such a
direct inspection of things is out of the question.  The only way in
which the mind concerned can discover that the thing is absent is by
referring to its other experiences.  This image is compared with other
images and is discovered to be in some way abnormal.  We decide that it
is a false representative and has no corresponding reality behind it.

This doctrine taken as it stands seems to cut the mind off from the
external world very completely; and the most curious thing about it is
that it seems to be built up on the assumption that it is not really
true.  How can one know certainly that there is a world of material
things, including human bodies with their sense-organs and nerves, if
no mind has ever been able to inspect directly anything of the sort?
How can we tell that a sensation arises when a nervous impulse has been
carried along a sensory nerve and has reached the brain, if every mind
is shut up to the charmed circle of its own ideas?  The anatomist and
the physiologist give us very detailed accounts of the sense-organs and
of the brain; the physiologist even undertakes to measure the speed
with which the impulse passes along a nerve; the psychologist accepts
and uses the results of their labors.  But can all this be done in the
absence of any first-hand knowledge of the things of which one is
talking?  Remember that, if the psychologist is right, any external
object, eye, ear, nerve, or brain, which we can perceive directly, is a
mental complex, a something in the mind and not external at all.  How
shall we prove that there are objects, ears, eyes, nerves, and
brains,--in short, all the requisite mechanism for the calling into
existence of sensations,--in an outer world which is not immediately
perceived but is only inferred to exist?

I do not wish to be regarded as impugning the right of the psychologist
to make the assumptions which he does, and to work as he does.  He has
a right to assume, with the plain man, that there is an external world
and that we know it.  But a very little reflection must make it
manifest that he seems, at least, to be guilty of an inconsistency, and
that he who wishes to think clearly should strive to see just where the
trouble lies.

So much, at least, is evident: the man who is inclined to doubt whether
there is, after all, any real external world, appears to find in the
psychologist's distinction between ideas and things something like an
excuse for his doubt.  To get to the bottom of the matter and to
dissipate his doubt one has to go rather deeply into metaphysics.  I
merely wish to show just here that the doubt is not a gratuitous one,
but is really suggested to the thoughtful mind by a reflection upon our
experience of things.  And, as we are all apt to think that the man of
science is less given to busying himself with useless subtleties than
is the philosopher, I shall, before closing this chapter, present some
paragraphs upon the subject from the pen of a professor of mathematics
and mechanics.

14. THE "TELEPHONE EXCHANGE."--"We are accustomed to talk," writes
Professor Karl Pearson,[1] "of the 'external world,' of the 'reality'
outside us.  We speak of individual objects having an existence
independent of our own.  The store of past sense-impressions, our
thoughts and memories, although most probably they have beside their
psychical element a close correspondence with some physical change or
impress in the brain, are yet spoken of as _inside_ ourselves.  On the
other hand, although if a sensory nerve be divided anywhere short of
the brain, we lose the corresponding class of sense impression, we yet
speak of many sense-impressions, such as form and texture, as existing
outside ourselves.  How close then can we actually get to this supposed
world outside ourselves?  Just as near but no nearer than the brain
terminals of the sensory nerves.  We are like the clerk in the central
telephone exchange who cannot get nearer to his customers than his end
of the telephone wires.  We are indeed worse off than the clerk, for to
carry out the analogy properly we must suppose him _never to have been
outside the telephone exchange, never to have seen a customer or any
one like a customer--in short, never, except through the telephone
wire, to have come in contact with the outside universe_.  Of that
'real' universe outside himself he would be able to form no direct
impression; the real universe for him would be the aggregate of his
constructs from the messages which were caused by the telephone wires
in his office.  About those messages and the ideas raised in his mind
by them he might reason and draw his inferences; and his conclusions
would be correct--for what?  For the world of telephonic messages, for
the type of messages that go through the telephone.  Something definite
and valuable he might know with regard to the spheres of action and of
thought of his telephonic subscribers, but outside those spheres he
could have no experience.  Pent up in his office he could never have
seen or touched even a telephonic subscriber _in himself_.  Very much
in the position of such a telephone clerk is the conscious _ego_ of
each one of us seated at the brain terminals of the sensory nerves.
Not a step nearer than those terminals can the _ego_ get to the 'outer
world,' and what in and for themselves are the subscribers to its nerve
exchange it has no means of ascertaining.  Messages in the form of
sense-impressions come flowing in from that 'outside world,' and these
we analyze, classify, store up, and reason about.  But of the nature of
'things-in-themselves,' of what may exist at the other end of our
system of telephone wires, we know nothing at all.

"But the reader, perhaps, remarks, 'I not only see an object, but I can
_touch_ it.  I can trace the nerve from the tip of my finger to the
brain.  I am not like the telephone clerk, I can follow my network of
wires to their terminals and find what is at the other end of them.'
Can you, reader?  Think for a moment whether your _ego_ has for one
moment got away from his brain exchange.  The sense-impression that you
call touch was just as much as sight felt only at the brain end of a
sensory nerve.  What has told you also of the nerve from the tip of
your finger to your brain?  Why, sense-impressions also, messages
conveyed along optic or tactile sensory nerves.  In truth, all you have
been doing is to employ one subscriber to your telephone exchange to
tell you about the wire that goes to a second, but you are just as far
as ever from tracing out for yourself the telephone wires to the
individual subscriber and ascertaining what his nature is in and for
himself.  The immediate sense-impression is just as far removed from
what you term the 'outside world' as the store of impresses.  If our
telephone clerk had recorded by aid of a phonograph certain of the
messages from the outside world on past occasions, then if any
telephonic message on its receipt set several phonographs repeating
past messages, we have an image analogous to what goes on in the brain.
Both telephone and phonograph are equally removed from what the clerk
might call the 'real outside world,' but they enable him through their
sounds to construct a universe; he projects those sounds, which are
really inside his office, outside his office, and speaks of them as the
external universe.  This outside world is constructed by him from the
contents of the inside sounds, which differ as widely from
things-in-themselves as language, the symbol, must always differ from
the thing it symbolizes.  For our telephone clerk sounds would be the
real world, and yet we can see how conditioned and limited it would be
by the range of his particular telephone subscribers and by the
contents of their messages.

"So it is with our brain; the sounds from telephone and phonograph
correspond to immediate and stored sense-impressions.  These
sense-impressions we project as it were outwards and term the real
world outside ourselves.  But the things-in-themselves which the
sense-impressions symbolize, the 'reality,' as the metaphysicians wish
to call it, at the other end of the nerve, remains unknown and is
unknowable.  Reality of the external world lies for science and for us
in combinations of form and color and touch--sense-impressions as
widely divergent from the thing 'at the other end of the nerve' as the
sound of the telephone from the subscriber at the other end of the
wire.  We are cribbed and confined in this world of sense-impressions
like the exchange clerk in his world of sounds, and not a step beyond
can we get.  As his world is conditioned and limited by his particular
network of wires, so ours is conditioned by our nervous system, by our
organs of sense.  Their peculiarities determine what is the nature of
the outside world which we construct.  It is the similarity in the
organs of sense and in the perceptive faculty of all normal human
beings which makes the outside world the same, or _practically_ the
same, for them all.  To return to the old analogy, it is as if two
telephone exchanges had very nearly identical groups of subscribers.
In this case a wire between the two exchanges would soon convince the
imprisoned clerks that they had something in common and peculiar to
themselves.  That conviction corresponds in our comparison to the
recognition of other consciousness."

I suggest that this extract be read over carefully, not once but
several times, and that the reader try to make quite clear to himself
the position of the clerk in the telephone exchange, _i.e._ the
position of the mind in the body, as depicted by Professor Pearson,
before recourse is had to the criticisms of any one else.  One cannot
find anywhere better material for critical philosophical reflection.

As has been seen, our author accepts without question, the
psychological doctrine that the mind is shut up within the circle of
the messages that are conducted to it along the sensory nerves, and
that it cannot directly perceive anything truly external.  He carries
his doctrine out to the bitter end in the conclusion that, since we
have never had experience of anything beyond sense-impressions, and
have no ground for an inference to anything beyond, we must recognize
that the only external world of which we know anything is an external
world built up out of sense-impressions.  It is, thus, in the mind, and
is not external at all; it is only "projected outwards," _thought of_
as though it were beyond us.  Shall we leave the inconsistent position
of the plain man and of the psychologist and take our refuge in this
world of projected mental constructs?

Before the reader makes up his mind to do this, I beg him to consider
the following:--

(1) If the only external world of which we have a right to speak at all
is a construct in the mind or _ego_, we may certainly affirm that the
world is in the _ego_, but does it sound sensible to say that the _ego_
is somewhere in the world?

(2) If all external things are really inside the mind, and are only
"projected" outwards, of course our own bodies, sense-organs, nerves,
and brains, are really inside and are merely projected outwards.  Now,
do the sense-impressions of which everything is to be constructed "come
flowing in" along these nerves that are really inside?

(3) Can we say, when a nerve lies entirely within the mind or _ego_,
that this same mind or _ego_ is nearer to one end of the nerve than it
is to the other?  How shall we picture to ourselves "the conscious
_ego_ of each one of us seated at the brain terminals of the sensory
nerves"?  How can the _ego_ place the whole of itself at the end of a
nerve which it has constructed within itself?  And why is it more
difficult for it to get to one end of a nerve like this than it is to
get to the other?

(4) Why should the thing "at the other end of the nerve" remain unknown
and unknowable?  Since the nerve is entirely in the mind, is purely a
mental construct, can anything whatever be at the end of it without
being in the mind?  And if the thing in question is not in the mind,
how are we going to prove that it is any nearer to one end of a nerve
which is inside the mind than it is to the other?  If it may really be
said to be at the end of the nerve, why may we not know it quite as
well as we do the end of the nerve, or any other mental construct?

It must be clear to the careful reader of Professor Pearson's
paragraphs, that he does not confine himself strictly to the world of
mere "projections," to an outer world which is really _inner_.  If he
did this, the distinction between inner and outer would disappear.  Let
us consider for a moment the imprisoned clerk.  He is in a telephone
exchange, about him are wires and subscribers.  He gets only sounds and
must build up his whole universe of things out of sounds.  Now we are
supposing him to be in a telephone exchange, to be receiving messages,
to be building up a world out of these messages.  Do we for a moment
think of him as building up, out of the messages which came along the
wires, those identical wires which carried the messages and the
subscribers which sent them?  Never! we distinguish between the
exchange, with its wires and subscribers, and the messages received and
worked up into a world.  In picturing to ourselves the telephone
exchange, we are doing what the plain man and the psychologist do when
they distinguish between mind and body,--they never suppose that the
messages which come through the senses are identical with the senses
through which they come.

But suppose we maintain that there is no such thing as a telephone
exchange, with its wires and subscribers, which is not to be found
within some clerk.  Suppose the real external world is something
_inner_ and only "projected" without, mistakenly supposed by the
unthinking to be without.  Suppose it is nonsense to speak of a wire
which is not in the mind of a clerk.  May we under such circumstances
describe any clerk as _in a telephone exchange_? as _receiving
messages_? as _no nearer_ to his subscribers than his end of the wire?
May we say that sense-impressions _come flowing in_ to him?  The whole
figure of the telephone exchange becomes an absurdity when we have once
placed the exchange within the clerk.  Nor can we think of two clerks
as connected by a wire, when it is affirmed that every wire must
"really" be in some clerk.

The truth is, that, in the extracts which I have given above and in
many other passages in the same volume, the real external world, the
world which does not exist in the mind but _without_ it, is much
discredited, and is yet not actually discarded.  The ego is placed at
the brain terminals of the sensory nerves, and it receives messages
which _flow in_; _i.e._ the clerk is actually placed in an exchange.
That the existence of the exchange is afterward denied in so many words
does not mean that it has not played and does not continue to play an
important part in the thought of the author.

It is interesting to see how a man of science, whose reflections compel
him to deny the existence of the external world that we all seem to
perceive and that we somehow recognize as distinct from anything in our
minds, is _nevertheless compelled to admit the existence of this world
at every turn_.

But if we do admit it, what shall we make of it?  Shall we deny the
truth of what the psychologist has to tell us about a knowledge of
things only through the sensations to which they give rise?  We cannot,
surely, do that.  Shall we affirm that we know the external world
directly, and at the same time that we do not know it directly, but
only indirectly, and through the images which arise in our minds?  That
seems inconsistent.  Certainly there is material for reflection here.

Nevertheless the more we reflect on that material, the more evident
does it become that the plain man cannot be wrong in believing in the
external world which seems revealed in his experiences.  We find that
all attempts to discredit it rest upon the implicit assumption of its
existence, and fall to the ground when that existence is honestly
denied.  So our problem changes its form.  We no longer ask: Is there
an external world?  but rather: _What_ is the external world, and how
does it differ from the world of mere ideas?


[1] "The Grammar of Science," 2d Ed., London, 1900, pp. 60-63.




CHAPTER IV

SENSATIONS AND "THINGS"

15. SENSE AND IMAGINATION.--Every one distinguishes between things
perceived and things only imagined.  With open eyes I see the desk
before me; with eyes closed, I can imagine it.  I lay my hand on it and
feel it; I can, without laying my hand on it, imagine that I feel it.
I raise my eyes, and see the pictures on the wall opposite me; I can
sit here and call before my mind the image of the door by which the
house is entered.

What is the difference between sense and imagination?  It must be a
difference of which we are all somehow conscious, for we unhesitatingly
distinguish between the things we perceive and the things we merely
imagine.

It is well to remember at the outset that the two classes of
experiences are not wholly different.  The blue color that I imagine
seems blue.  It does not lose this quality because it is only
imaginary.  The horse that I imagine seems to have four legs, like a
horse perceived.  As I call it before my mind, it seems as large as the
real horse.  Neither the color, nor the size, nor the distribution of
parts, nor any other attribute of the sort appears to be different in
the imaginary object from what it is in the object as given in
sensation.

The two experiences are, nevertheless, not the same; and every one
knows that they are not the same.  One difference that roughly marks
out the two classes of experiences from one another is that, as a rule,
our sense-experiences are more vivid than are the images that exist in
the imagination.

I say, as a rule, for we cannot always remark this difference.
Sensations may be very clear and unmistakable, but they may also be
very faint and indefinite.  When a man lays his hand firmly on my
shoulder, I may be in little doubt whether I feel a sensation or do
not; but when he touches my back very lightly, I may easily be in
doubt, and may ask myself in perplexity whether I have really been
touched or whether I have merely imagined it.  As a vessel recedes and
becomes a mere speck upon the horizon, I may well wonder, before I feel
sure that it is really quite out of sight, whether I still see the dim
little point, or whether I merely imagine that I see it.

On the other hand, things merely imagined may sometimes be very vivid
and insistent.  To some persons, what exists in the imagination is dim
and indefinite in the extreme.  Others imagine things vividly, and can
describe what is present only to the imagination almost as though it
were something seen.  Finally, we know that an image may become so
vivid and insistent as to be mistaken for an external thing.  That is
to say, there are such things as hallucinations.

The criterion of vividness will not, therefore, always serve to
distinguish between what is given in the sense and what is only
imagined.  And, indeed, it becomes evident, upon reflection, that we do
not actually make it our ultimate test.  We may be quite willing to
admit that faint sensations may come to be confused with what is
imagined, with "ideas," but we always regard such a confusion as
somebody's error.  We are not ready to admit that things perceived
faintly are things imagined, or that vivid "ideas" are things perceived
by sense.

Let us come back to the illustrations with which we started.  How do I
know that I perceive the desk before me; and how do I know that,
sitting here, I imagine, and do not see, the front door of the house?

My criterion is this: when I have the experience I call "seeing my
desk," the bit of experience which presents itself as my desk is in a
certain setting.  That is to say, the desk seen must be in a certain
relation to my body, and this body, as I know it, also consists of
experiences.  Thus, if I am to know that I see the desk, I must realize
that my eyes are open, that the object is in front of me and not behind
me, etc.

The desk as seen varies with the relation to the body in certain ways
that we regard as natural and explicable.  When I am near it, the
visual experience is not just what it is when I recede from it.  But
how can I know that I am near the desk or far from it?  What do these
expressions mean?  Their full meaning will become clearer in the next
chapter, but here I may say that nearness and remoteness must be
measured for me in experiences of some sort, or I would never know
anything as near to or far from my body.

Thus, all our sensory experiences are experiences that fall into a
certain system or order.  It is a system which we all recognize
implicitly, for we all reject as merely imaginary those experiences
which lack this setting.  If my eyes are shut--I am speaking now of the
eyes as experienced, as felt or perceived, as given in sensation--I
never say; "I see my desk," no matter how vivid the image of the
object.  Those who believe in "second sight" sometimes talk of seeing
things not in this setting, but the very name they give to the supposed
experience indicates that there is something abnormal about it.  No one
thinks it remarkable that I see the desk before which I perceive myself
to be sitting with open eyes.  Every one would think it strange if I
could see and describe the table in the next room, now shut away from
me.  When a man thinks he hears his name pronounced, and, turning his
head, seeks in vain for the speaker, he sets his experience down as a
hallucination.  He says, I did not really hear that; I merely imagined
it.

May one not, with open eyes, have a hallucination of vision, just as
one may seem to hear one's name pronounced when no one is by?
Certainly.  But in each case the experience may be proved to be a
hallucination, nevertheless.  It may be recognized that the sensory
setting is incomplete, though it may not, at first, seem so.  Thus the
unreal object which seems to be seen may be found to be a thing that
cannot be touched.  Or, when one has attained to a relatively complete
knowledge of the system of experiences recognized as sensory, one may
make use of roundabout methods of ascertaining that the experience in
question does not really have the right setting.  Thus, the ghost which
is seen by the terrified peasant at midnight, but which cannot be
photographed, we may unhesitatingly set down as something imagined and
not really seen.

All our sensations are, therefore, experiences which take their place
in a certain setting.  This is our ultimate criterion.  We need not
take the word of the philosopher for it.  We need only reflect, and ask
ourselves how we know that, in a given case, we are seeing or hearing
or touching something, and are not merely imagining it.  In every case,
we shall find that we come back to the same test.  In common life, we
apply the test instinctively, and with little realization of what we
are doing.

And if we turn to the psychologist, whose business it is to be more
exact and scientific, we find that he gives us only a refinement of
this same criterion.  It is important to him to distinguish between
what is given in sensation and what is furnished by memory or
imagination, and he tells us that sensation is the result of a message
conducted along a sensory nerve to the brain.

Here we see emphasized the relation to the body which has been
mentioned above.  If we ask the psychologist how he knows that the body
he is talking about is a real body, and not merely an imagined one, he
has to fall back upon the test which is common to us all.  A real hand
is one which we see with the eyes open, and which we touch with the
other hand.  If our experiences of our own body had not the setting
which marks all sensory experiences, we could never say: I _perceive_
that my body is near the desk.  When we call our body real, as
contrasted with things imaginary, we recognize that this group of
experiences belongs to the class described; it is given in sensation,
and is not merely thought of.

It will be observed that, in distinguishing between sensations and
things imaginary, we never go beyond the circle of our experiences.  We
do not reach out to a something _beyond_ or _behind_ experiences, and
say: When such a reality is present, we may affirm that we have a
sensation, and when it is not, we may call the experience imaginary.
If there were such a reality as this, it would do us little good, for
since it is not supposed to be perceived directly, we should have to
depend upon the sensations to prove the presence of the reality, and
could not turn to the reality and ask it whether we were or were not
experiencing a sensation.  The distinction between sensations and what
is imaginary is an _observed_ distinction.  It can be _proved_ that
some experiences are sensory and that some are not.  This means that,
in drawing the distinction, we remain within the circle of our
experiences.

There has been much unnecessary mystification touching this supposed
reality behind experiences.  In the next chapter we shall see in what
senses the word "reality" may properly be used, and in what sense it
may not.  There is a danger in using it loosely and vaguely.

16. MAY WE CALL "THINGS" GROUPS OF SENSATIONS?--Now, the external world
seems to the plain man to be directly given in his sense experiences.
He is willing to admit that the table in the next room, of which he is
merely thinking, is known at one remove, so to speak.  But this desk
here before him: is it not known directly?  Not the mental image, the
mere representative, but the desk itself, a something that is physical
and not mental?

And the psychologist, whatever his theory of the relation between the
mind and the world, seems to support him, at least, in so far as to
maintain that in sensation the external world is known as directly as
it is possible for the external world to be known, and that one can get
no more of it than is presented in sensation.  If a sense is lacking,
an aspect of the world as given is also lacking; if a sense is
defective, as in the color-blind, the defect is reflected in the world
upon which one gazes.

Such considerations, especially when taken together with what has been
said at the close of the last section about the futility of looking for
a reality behind our sensations, may easily suggest rather a startling
possibility.  May it not be, if we really are shut up to the circle of
our experiences, that the physical things, which we have been
accustomed to look upon as non-mental, are nothing more than complexes
of sensations?  Granted that there seems to be presented in our
experience a material world as well as a mind, may it not be that this
material world is a mental thing of a certain kind--a mental thing
contrasted with other mental things, such as imaginary things?

This question has always been answered in the affirmative by the
idealists, who claim that all existence must be regarded as psychical
existence.  Their doctrine we shall consider later (sections 49 and
53).  It will be noticed that we seem to be back again with Professor
Pearson in the last chapter.

To this question I make the following answer: In the first place, I
remark that even the plain man distinguishes somehow between his
sensations and external things.  He thinks that he has reason to
believe that things do not cease to exist when he no longer has
sensations.  Moreover, he believes that things do not always appear to
his senses as they really are.  If we tell him that his sensations
_are_ the things, it shocks his common sense.  He answers: Do you mean
to tell me that complexes of sensation can be on a shelf or in a
drawer? can be cut with a knife or broken with the hands?  He feels
that there must be some real distinction between sensations and the
things without him.

Now, the notions of the plain man on such matters as these are not very
clear, and what he says about sensations and things is not always
edifying.  But it is clear that he feels strongly that the man who
would identify them is obliterating a distinction to which his
experience testifies unequivocally.  We must not hastily disregard his
protest.  He is sometimes right in his feeling that things are not
identical, even when he cannot prove it.

In the second place, I remark that, in this instance, the plain man is
in the right, and can be shown to be in the right.  "Things" are not
groups of sensations.  The distinction between them will be explained
in the next section.

17. THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN SENSATIONS AND "THINGS"--Suppose that I
stand in my study and look at the fire in the grate.  I am experiencing
sensations, and am not busied merely with an imaginary fire.  But may
my whole experience of the fire be summed up as an experience of
sensations and their changes?  Let us see.

If I shut my eyes, the fire disappears.  Does any one suppose that the
fire has been annihilated?  No.  We say, I no longer see it, but
nothing has happened to the fire.

Again, I may keep my eyes open, and simply turn my head.  The fire
disappears once more.  Does any one suppose that my turning my head has
done anything to the fire?  We say unhesitatingly, my sensations have
changed, but the fire has remained as it was.

Still, again, I may withdraw from the fire.  Its heat seems to be
diminished.  Has the fire really grown less hot?  And if I could
withdraw to a sufficient distance, I know that the fire would appear to
me smaller and less bright.  Could I get far enough away to make it
seem the faintest speck in the field of vision, would I be tempted to
claim that the fire shrunk and grew faint merely because I walked away
from it?  Surely not.

Now, suppose that I stand on the same spot and look at the fire without
turning my head.  The stick at which I am gazing catches the flame,
blazes up, turns red, and finally falls together, a little mass of gray
ashes.  Shall I describe this by saying that my sensations have
changed, or may I say that the fire itself has changed?  The plain man
and the philosopher alike use the latter expression in such a case as
this.

Let us take another illustration.  I walk towards the distant house on
the plain before me.  What I see as my goal seems to grow larger and
brighter.  It does not occur to me to maintain that the house changes
as I advance.  But, at a given instant, changes of a different sort
make their appearance.  Smoke arises, and flames burst from the roof.
Now I have no hesitation in saying that changes are taking place in the
house.  It would seem foolish to describe the occurrence as a mere
change in my sensations.  Before it was my sensations that changed; now
it is the house itself.

We are drawing this distinction between changes in our sensations and
changes in things at every hour in the day.  I cannot move without
making things appear and disappear.  If I wag my head, the furniture
seems to dance, and I regard it as a mere seeming.  I count on the
clock's going when I no longer look upon its face.  It would be absurd
to hold that the distinction is a mere blunder, and has no foundation
in our experience.  The rôle it plays is too important for that.  If we
obliterate it, the real world of material things which seems to be
revealed in our experience melts into a chaos of fantastic experiences
whose appearances and disappearances seem to be subject to no law.

And it is worthy of remark that it is not merely in common life that
the distinction is drawn.  Every man of science must give heed to it.
The psychologist does, it is true, pay much attention to sensations;
but even he distinguishes between the sensations which he is studying
and the material things to which he relates them, such as brains and
sense-organs.  And those who cultivate the physical sciences strive,
when they give an account of things and their behavior, to lay before
us a history of changes analogous to the burning of the stick and of
the house, excluding mere changes in sensations.

There is no physicist or botanist or zoölogist who has not our common
experience that things as perceived by us--our experiences of
things--appear or disappear or change their character when we open or
shut our eyes or move about.  But nothing of all this appears in their
books.  What they are concerned with is things and their changes, and
they do not consider such matters as these as falling within their
province.  If a botanist could not distinguish between the changes
which take place in a plant, and the changes which take place in his
sensations as he is occupied in studying the plant, but should tell us
that the plant grows smaller as one recedes from it, we should set him
down as weak-minded.

That the distinction is everywhere drawn, and that we must not
obliterate it, is very evident.  But we are in the presence of what has
seemed to many men a grave difficulty.  Are not things presented in our
experience only as we have sensations?  what is it to perceive a thing?
is it not to have sensations? how, then, _can_ we distinguish between
sensations and things?  We certainly do so all the time, in spite of
the protest of the philosopher; but many of us do so with a haunting
sense that our behavior can scarcely be justified by the reason.

Our difficulty, however, springs out of an error of our own.  Grasping
imperfectly the full significance of the word "sensation," we extend
its use beyond what is legitimate, and we call by that name experiences
which are not sensations at all.  Thus the external world comes to seem
to us to be not really a something contrasted with the mental, but a
part of the mental world.  We accord to it the attributes of the
latter, and rob it of those distinguishing attributes which belong to
it by right.  When we have done this, we may feel impelled to say, as
did Professor Pearson, that things are not really "outside" of us, as
they seem to be, but are merely "projected" outside--thought of as if
they were "outside."  All this I must explain at length.

Let us come back to the first of the illustrations given above, the
case of the fire in my study.  As I stand and look at it, what shall I
call the red glow which I observe?  Shall I call it a _quality of a
thing_, or shall I call it a _sensation_?

To this I answer: _I may call it either the one or the other, according
to its setting among other experiences_.

We have seen (section 15) that sensations and things merely imaginary
are distinguished from one another by their setting.  With open eyes we
see things; with our eyes closed we can imagine them: we see what is
before us; we imagine what lies behind our backs.  If we confine our
attention to the bit of experience itself, we have no means of
determining whether it is sensory or imaginary.  Only its setting can
decide that point.  Here, we have come to another distinction of much
the same sort.  That red glow, that bit of experience, taken by itself
and abstracted from all other experiences, cannot be called either a
sensation or the quality of a thing.  Only its context can give us the
right to call it the one or the other.

This ought to become clear when we reflect upon the illustration of the
fire.  We have seen that one whole series of changes has been
unhesitatingly described as a series of changes in my sensations.  Why
was this?  Because it was observed to depend upon changes in the
relations of my body, my senses (a certain group of experiences), to
the bit of experience I call the fire.  Another series was described as
a series of changes in the fire.  Why?  Because, the relation to my
senses remaining unchanged, changes still took place, and had to be
accounted for in other ways.

It is a matter of common knowledge that they can be accounted for in
other ways.  This is not a discovery of the philosopher.  He can only
invite us to think over the matter and see what the unlearned and the
learned are doing at every moment.  Sometimes they are noticing that
experiences change as they turn their heads or walk toward or away from
objects; sometimes they abstract from this, and consider the series of
changes that take place independently of this.

That bit of experience, that red glow, is not related only to my body.
Such experiences are related also to each other; they stand in a vast
independent system of relations, which, as we have seen, the man of
science can study without troubling himself to consider sensations at
all.  This system is the external world--the external world as known or
as knowable, the only external world that it means anything for us to
talk about.  As having its place in this system, a bit of experience is
not a sensation, but is a quality or aspect of a thing.

Sensations, then, to be sensations, must be bits of experience
considered in their relation to some organ of sense.  They should never
be confused with qualities of things, which are experiences in a
different setting.  It is as unpardonable to confound the two as it is
to confound sensations with things imaginary.

We may not, therefore, say that "things" are groups of sensations.  We
may, if we please, describe them as complexes of qualities.  And we may
not say that the "things" we perceive are really "inside" of us and are
merely "projected outside."

What can "inside" and "outside" mean?  Only this.  We recognize in our
experience two distinct orders, the _objective order_, the system of
phenomena which constitutes the material world, and the _subjective
order_, the order of things mental, to which belong sensations and
"ideas."  That is "outside" which belongs to the objective order.  The
word has no other meaning when used in this connection.  That is
"inside" which belongs to the subjective order, and is contrasted with
the former.

If we deny that there is an objective order, an external world, and say
that everything is "inside," we lose our distinction, and even the word
"inside" becomes meaningless.  It indicates no contrast.  When men fall
into the error of talking in this way, what they do is to _keep_ the
external world and gain the distinction, and at the same time to _deny_
the existence of the world which has furnished it.  In other words,
they put the clerk into a telephone exchange, and then tell us that the
exchange does not really exist.  He is inside--of what?  He is inside
of nothing.  Then, can he really be inside?

We see, thus, that the plain man and the man of science are quite right
in accepting the external world.  The objective order is known as
directly as is the subjective order.  Both are orders of experiences;
they are open to observation, and we have, in general, little
difficulty in distinguishing between them, as the illustrations given
above amply prove.

18. THE EXISTENCE OF MATERIAL THINGS.--One difficulty seems to remain
and to call for a solution.  We all believe that material things exist
when we no longer perceive them.  We believe that they existed before
they came within the field of our observation.

In these positions the man of science supports us.  The astronomer has
no hesitation in saying that the comet, which has sailed away through
space, exists, and will return.  The geologist describes for us the
world as it was in past ages, when no eye was opened upon it.

But has it not been stated above that the material world is an order of
_experiences_? and can there be such a thing as an experience that is
not _experienced_ by somebody?  In other words, can the world exist,
except as it is _perceived to exist_?

This seeming difficulty has occasioned much trouble to philosophers in
the past.  Bishop Berkeley (1684-1753) said, "To exist is to be
perceived."  There are those who agree with him at the present day.

Their difficulty would have disappeared had they examined with
sufficient care the meaning of the word "exist."  We have no right to
pass over the actual uses of such words, and to give them a meaning of
our own.  If one thing seems as certain as any other, it is that
material things exist when we do not perceive them.  On what ground may
the philosopher combat the universal opinion, the dictum of common
sense and of science?  When we look into his reasonings, we find that
he is influenced by the error discussed at length in the last
section--he has confused the phenomena of the two orders of experience.

I have said that, when we concern ourselves with the objective order,
we abstract or should abstract, from the relations which things bear to
our senses.  We account for phenomena by referring to other phenomena
which we have reason to accept as their physical conditions or causes.
We do not consider that a physical cause is effective only while we
perceive it.  When we come back to this notion of our perceiving a
thing or not perceiving it, we have left the objective order and passed
over to the subjective.  We have left the consideration of "things" and
have turned to sensations.

There is no reason why we should do this.  The physical order is an
independent order, as we have seen.  The man of science, when he is
endeavoring to discover whether some thing or quality of a thing really
existed at some time in the past, is not in the least concerned to
establish the fact that some one saw it.  No one ever saw the primitive
fire-mist from which, as we are told, the world came into being.  But
the scientist cares little for that.  He is concerned only to prove
that the phenomena he is investigating really have a place in the
objective order.  If he decides that they have, he is satisfied; he has
proved something to exist.  _To belong to the objective order is to
exist as a physical thing or quality_.

When the plain man and the man of science maintain that a physical
thing exists, they use the word in precisely the same sense.  The
meaning they give to it is the proper meaning of the word.  It is
justified by immemorial usage, and it marks a real distinction.  Shall
we allow the philosopher to tell us that we must not use it in this
sense, but must say that only sensations and ideas exist?  Surely not.
This would mean that we permit him to obliterate for us the distinction
between the external world and what is mental.

But is it right to use the word "experience" to indicate the phenomena
which have a place in the objective order?  Can an experience be
anything but mental?

There can be no doubt that the suggestions of the word are
unfortunate--it has what we may call a subjective flavor.  It suggests
that, after all, the things we perceive are sensations or percepts, and
must, to exist at all, exist in a mind.  As we have seen, this is an
error, and an error which we all avoid in actual practice.  We do not
take sensations for things, and we recognize clearly enough that it is
one thing for a material object to exist and another for it to be
perceived.

Why, then, use the word "experience"?  Simply because we have no better
word.  We must use it, and not be misled by the associations which
cling to it.  The word has this great advantage: it brings out clearly
the fact that all our knowledge of the external world rests ultimately
upon those phenomena which, when we consider them in relation to our
senses, we recognize as sensations.  We cannot start out from mere
imaginings to discover what the world was like in the ages past.

It is this truth that is recognized by the plain man, when he maintains
that, in the last resort, we can know things only in so far as we see,
touch, hear, taste, and smell them; and by the psychologist, when he
tells us that, in sensation, the external world is revealed as directly
as it is possible that it could be revealed.  But it is a travesty on
this truth to say that we do not know things, but know only our
sensations of sight, touch, taste, hearing, and the like.[1]


[1] See the note on this chapter at the close of the volume.




CHAPTER V

APPEARANCES AND REALITIES

19. THINGS AND THEIR APPEARANCES.--We have seen in the last chapter
that there is an external world and that it is given in our experience.
There is an objective order, and we are all capable of distinguishing
between it and the subjective.  He who says that we perceive only
sensations and ideas flies in the face of the common experience of
mankind.

But we are not yet through with the subject.  We all make a distinction
between things as they _appear_ and things as they _really are_.

If we ask the plain man, What is the real external world? the first
answer that seems to present itself to his mind is this: Whatever we
can see, hear, touch, taste, or smell may be regarded as belonging to
the real world.  What we merely imagine does not belong to it.

That this answer is not a very satisfactory one occurred to men's minds
very early in the history of reflective thought.  The ancient skeptic
said to himself: The colors of objects vary according to the light, and
according to the position and distance of the objects; can we say that
any object has a real color of its own?  A staff stuck into water looks
bent, but feels straight to the touch; why believe the testimony of one
sense rather than that of another?

Such questionings led to far-reaching consequences.  They resulted in a
forlorn distrust of the testimony of the senses, and to  a doubt as to
our ability to know anything as it really is.

Now, the distinction between appearances and realities exists for us as
well as for the ancient skeptic, and without being tempted to make such
extravagant statements as that there is no such thing as truth, and
that every appearance is as real as any other, we may admit that it is
not very easy to see the full significance of the distinction, although
we are referring to it constantly.

For example, we look from our window and see, as we say, a tree at a
distance.  What we are conscious of is a small bluish patch of color.
Now, a small bluish patch of color is not, strictly speaking, a tree;
but for us it represents the tree.  Suppose that we walk toward the
tree.  Do we continue to see what we saw before?  Of course, we say
that we continue to see the same tree; but it is plain that what we
immediately perceive, what is given in consciousness, does not remain
the same as we move.  Our blue patch of color grows larger and larger;
it ceases to be blue and faint; at the last it has been replaced by an
expanse of vivid green, and we see the tree just before us.

During our whole walk we have been seeing the tree.  This appears to
mean that we have been having a whole series of visual experiences, no
two of which were just alike, and each of which was taken as a
representative of the tree.  Which of these representatives is most
like the tree?  Is the tree _really_ a faint blue, or is it _really_ a
vivid green?  Or is it of some intermediate color?

Probably most persons will be inclined to maintain that the tree only
seems blue at a distance, but that it really is green, as it appears
when one is close to it.  In a sense, the statement is just; yet some
of those who make it would be puzzled to tell by what right they pick
out of the whole series of experiences, each of which represents the
tree as seen from some particular position, one individual experience,
which they claim not only represents the tree as seen from a given
point but also represents it as it is.  Does this particular experience
bear some peculiar earmark which tells us that it is like the real tree
while the others are unlike it?

20. REAL THINGS.--And what is this _real tree_ that we are supposed to
see as it is when we are close to it?

About two hundred years ago the philosopher Berkeley pointed out that
the distinction commonly made between things as they look, the
apparent, and things as they are, the real, is at bottom the
distinction between things as presented to the sense of sight and
things as presented to the sense of touch.  The acute analysis which he
made has held its own ever since.

We have seen that, in walking towards the tree, we have a long series
of visual experiences, each of which differs more or less from all of
the others.  Nevertheless, from the beginning of our progress to the
end, we say that we are looking at the same tree.  The images change
color and grow larger.  We do not say that the tree changes color and
grows larger.  Why do we speak as we do?  It is because, all along the
line, we mean by the real tree, not what is given to the sense of
sight, but something for which this stands as a sign.  This something
must be given in our experience somewhere, we must be able to perceive
it under some circumstances or other, or it would never occur to us to
recognize the visual experiences as _signs_, and we should never say
that in being conscious of them in succession we are looking at the
same tree.  They are certainly not the same with each other; how can we
know that they all stand for the same thing, unless we have had
experience of a connection of the whole series with one thing?

This thing for which so many different visual experiences may serve as
signs is the thing revealed in experiences of touch.  When we ask: In
what direction is the tree?  How far away is the tree?  How big is the
tree? we are always referring to the tree revealed in touch.  It is
nonsense to say that _what we see_ is far away, if by what we see we
mean the visual experience itself.  As soon as we move we lose that
visual experience and get another, and to recover the one we lost we
must go back where we were before.  When we say we see a tree at a
distance, we must mean, then, that we know from certain visual
experiences which we have that by moving a certain distance we will be
able to touch a tree.  And what does it mean to move a certain
distance?  In the last analysis it means to us to have a certain
quantity of movement sensations.

Thus the real world of things, for which experiences of sight serve as
signs, is a world revealed in experiences of touch and movement, and
when we speak of real positions, distances, and magnitudes, we are
always referring to this world.  But this is a world revealed in our
experience, and it does not seem a hopeless task to discover what may
properly be called real and what should be described as merely
apparent, when both the real and the apparent are open to our
inspection.

Can we not find in this analysis a satisfactory explanation of the
plain man's claim that under certain circumstances he sees the tree as
it is and under others he does not?  What he is really asserting is
that one visual experience gives him better information regarding the
real thing, the touch thing, than does another.

But what shall we say of his claim that the tree is really green, and
only looks blue under certain circumstances?  Is it not just as true
that the tree only looks green under certain circumstances?  Is color
any part of the touch thing?  Is it ever more than a sign of the touch
thing?  How can one color be more real than another?

Now, we may hold to Berkeley's analysis and maintain that, in general,
the real world, as contrasted with the apparent, means to us the world
that is revealed in experiences of touch and movement; and yet we may
admit that the word "real" is sometimes used in rather different senses.

It does not seem absurd for a woman to Say: This piece of silk really
is yellow; it only looks white under this light.  We all admit that a
white house may look pink under the rays of the setting sun, and we
never call it a pink house.  We have seen that it is not unnatural to
say: That tree is really green; it is only its distance that makes it
look blue.

When one reflects upon these uses of the word "real," one recognizes
the fact that, among all the experiences in which things are revealed
to us, certain experiences impress us as being more prominent or
important or serviceable than certain others, and they come to be
called _real_.  Things are not commonly seen by artificial light; the
sun is not always setting; the tree looks green when it is seen most
satisfactorily.  In each case, the real color of the thing is the color
that it has under circumstances that strike us as normal or as
important.  We cannot say that we always regard as most real that
aspect under which we most commonly perceive things, for if a more
unusual experience is more serviceable and really gives us more
information about the thing, we give the preference to that.  Thus we
look with the naked eye at a moving speck on the table before us, and
we are unable to distinguish its parts.  We place a microscope over the
speck and perceive an insect with all its members.  The second
experience is the more unusual one, but would not every one say: Now we
perceive the thing _as it is_?

21. ULTIMATE REAL THINGS.--Let us turn away from the senses of the word
"real," which recognize one color or taste or odor as more real than
another, and come back to the real world of things presented in
sensations of touch.  All other classes of sensations may be regarded
as related to this as the series of visual experiences above mentioned
was related to the one tree which was spoken of as revealed in them
all, the touch tree of which they gave information.

Can we say that this world is always to be regarded as reality and
never as appearance?  We have already seen (section 8) that science
does not regard as anything more than appearance the real things which
seem to be directly presented in our experience.

This pen that I hold in my hand seems, as I pass my fingers over it, to
be continuously extended.  It does not appear to present an alternation
of filled spaces and empty spaces.  I am told that it is composed of
molecules in rapid motion and at considerable distances from one
another.  I am further told that each molecule is composed of atoms,
and is, in its turn, not a continuous thing, but, so to speak, a group
of little things.

If I accept this doctrine, as it seems I must, am I not forced to
conclude that the reality which is given in my experience, the reality
with which I have contrasted appearances and to which I have referred
them, is, after all, itself only an appearance?  The touch things which
I have hitherto regarded as the real things that make up the external
world, the touch things for which all my visual experiences have served
as signs, are, then, not themselves real external things, but only the
appearances under which real external things, themselves imperceptible,
manifest themselves to me.

It seems, then, that I do not directly perceive any real thing, or, at
least, anything that can be regarded as more than an appearance.  What,
then, is the external world?  What are things really like?  Can we give
any true account of them, or are we forced to say with the skeptics
that we only know how things seem to us, and must abandon the attempt
to tell what they are really like?

Now, before one sets out to answer a question it is well to find out
whether it is a sensible question to ask and a sensible question to try
to answer.  He who asks: Where is the middle of an infinite line?  When
did all time begin?  Where is space as a whole? does not deserve a
serious answer to his questions.  And it is well to remember that he
who asks: What is the external world like? must keep his question a
significant one, if he is to retain his right to look for an answer at
all.  He has manifestly no right to ask us: How does the external world
look when no one is looking?  How do things feel when no one feels
them?  How shall I think of things, not as I think of them, but as they
are?

If we are to give an account of the external world at all, it must
evidently be _an account_ of the external world; _i.e._ it must be
given in terms of our experience of things.  The only legitimate
problem is to give a true account instead of a false one, to
distinguish between what only appears and is not real and what both
appears and is real.

Bearing this in mind, let us come back to the plain man's experience of
the world.  He certainly seems to himself to perceive a real world of
things, and he constantly distinguishes, in a way very serviceable to
himself, between the merely apparent and the real.  There is, of
course, a sense in which every experience is real; it is, at least, an
experience; but when he contrasts real and apparent he means something
more than this.  Experiences are not relegated to this class or to that
merely at random, but the final decision is the outcome of a long
experience of the differences which characterize different individual
experiences and is an expression of the relations which are observed to
hold between them.  Certain experiences are accepted as signs, and
certain others come to take the more dignified position of thing
signified; the mind rests in them and regards them as the real.

We have seen above that the world of real things in which the plain man
finds himself is a world of objects revealed in experiences of touch.
When he asks regarding anything: How far away is it?  How big is it?
In what direction is it? it is always the touch thing that interests
him.  What is given to the other senses is only a sign of this.

We have also seen (section 8) that the world of atoms and molecules of
which the man of science tells us is nothing more than a further
development of the world of the plain man.  The real things with which
science concerns itself are, after all, only minute touch things,
conceived just as are the things with which the plain man is familiar.
They exist in space and move about in space, as the things about us are
perceived to exist in space and move about in space.  They have size
and position, and are separated by distances.  We do not _perceive_
them, it is true; but we _conceive_ them after the analogy of the
things that we do perceive, and it is not inconceivable that, if our
senses were vastly more acute, we might perceive them directly.

Now, when we conclude that the things directly perceptible to the sense
of touch are to be regarded as appearances, as signs of the presence of
these minuter things, do we draw such a conclusion arbitrarily?  By no
means.  The distinction between appearance and reality is drawn here
just as it is drawn in the world of our common everyday experiences.
The great majority of the touch things about us we are not actually
touching at any given moment.  We only _see_ the things, _i.e._ we have
certain _signs_ of their presence.  None the less we believe that the
things exist all the time.  And in the same way the man of science does
not doubt the existence of the real things of which he speaks; he
perceives their _signs_.  That certain experiences are to be taken as
signs of such realities he has established by innumerable observations
and careful deductions from those observations.  To see the full force
of his reasonings one must read some work setting forth the history of
the atomic theory.

If, then, we ask the question: What is the real external world?  it is
clear that we cannot answer it satisfactorily without taking into
consideration the somewhat shifting senses of the word "real."  What is
the real external world to the plain man?  It is the world of touch
things, of objects upon which he can lay his hands.  What is the real
external world to the man of science?  It is the world of atoms and
molecules, of minuter touch things that he cannot actually touch, but
which he conceives as though he could touch them.

It should be observed that the man of science has no right to deny the
real world which is revealed in the experience of the plain man.  In
all his dealings with the things which interest him in common life, he
refers to this world just as the plain man does.  He sees a tree and
walks towards it, and distinguishes between its real and its apparent
color, its real and its apparent size.  He talks about seeing things as
they are, or not seeing things as they are.  These distinctions in his
experience of things remain even after he has come to believe in atoms
and molecules.

Thus, the touch object, the tree as he feels it under his hand, may
come to be regarded as the sign of the presence of those entities that
science seems, at present, to regard as ultimate.  Does this prevent it
from being the object which has stood as the interpreter of all those
diverse visual sensations that we have called different views of the
tree?  They are still the appearances, and it, relatively to them, is
the reality.  Now we find that it, in its turn, can be used as a sign
of something else, can be regarded as an appearance of a reality more
ultimate.  It is clear, then, that the same thing may be regarded both
as appearance and as reality--appearance as contrasted with one thing,
and reality as contrasted with another.

But suppose one says: _I do not want to know what the real external
world is to this man or to that man; I want to know what the real
external world is_.  What shall we say to such a demand?

There is a sense in which such a demand is not purely meaningless,
though it may not be a very sensible demand to make.  We have seen that
an increase of knowledge about things compels a man to pass from the
real things of common life to the real things of science, and to look
upon the former as appearance.  Now, a man may arbitrarily decide that
he will use the word "reality" to indicate only that which can never in
its turn be regarded as appearance, a reality which must remain an
ultimate reality; and he may insist upon our telling him about that.
How a man not a soothsayer can tell when he has come to ultimate
reality, it is not easy to see.

Suppose, however, that we could give any one such information.  We
should then be telling him about things _as they are_, it is true, but
his knowledge of things would not be different in _kind_ from what it
was before.  The only difference between such a knowledge of things and
a knowledge of things not known to be ultimate would be that, in the
former case, it would be recognized that no further extension of
knowledge was possible.  The distinction between appearance and reality
would remain just what it was in the experience of the plain man.

22. THE BUGBEAR OF THE "UNKNOWABLE."--It is very important to recognize
that we must not go on talking about appearance and reality, as if our
words really meant something, when we have quite turned our backs upon
our experience of appearances and the realities which they represent.

That appearances and realities are connected we know very well, for we
perceive them to be connected.  What we see, we can touch.  And we not
only know that appearances and realities are connected, but we know
with much detail what appearances are to be taken as signs of what
realities.  The visual experience which I call the house as seen from a
distance I never think of taking for a representative of the hat which
I hold in my hand.  This visual experience I refer to its own
appropriate touch thing, and not to another.  If what _looks like_ a
beefsteak could _really be_ a fork or a mountain or a kitten
indifferently,--but I must not even finish the sentence, for the words
"look like" and "could really be" lose all significance when we loosen
the bond between appearances and the realities to which they are
properly referred.

Each appearance, then, must be referred to some particular real thing
and not to any other.  This is true of the appearances which we
recognize as such in common life, and it is equally true of the
appearances recognized as such in science.  The pen which I feel
between my fingers I may regard as appearance and refer to a swarm of
moving atoms.  But it would be silly for me to refer it to atoms "in
general."  The reality to which I refer the appearance in question is a
particular group of atoms existing at a particular point in space.  The
chemist never supposes that the atoms within the walls of his test-tube
are identical with those in the vial on the shelf.  Neither in common
life nor in science would the distinction between appearances and real
things be of the smallest service were it not possible to distinguish
between this appearance and that, and this reality and that, and to
refer each appearance to its appropriate reality.  Indeed, it is
inconceivable that, under such circumstances, the distinction should
have been drawn at all.

These points ought to be strongly insisted upon, for we find certain
philosophic writers falling constantly into a very curious abuse of the
distinction and making much capital of it.  It is argued that what we
see, what we touch, what we conceive as a result of scientific
observation and reflection--all is, in the last analysis, material
which is given us in sensation.  The various senses furnish us with
different classes of sensations; we work these up into certain
complexes.  But sensations are only the impressions which something
outside of us makes upon us.  Hence, although we seem to ourselves to
know the external world as it is, our knowledge can never extend beyond
the impressions made upon us.  Thus, we are absolutely shut up to
_appearances_, and can know nothing about the _reality_ to which they
must be referred.

Touching this matter Herbert Spencer writes[1] as follows: "When we are
taught that a piece of matter, regarded by us as existing externally,
cannot be really known, but that we can know only certain impressions
produced on us, we are yet, by the relativity of thought, compelled to
think of these in relation to a cause--the notion of a real existence
which generated these impressions becomes nascent.  If it be proved
that every notion of a real existence which we can frame is
inconsistent with itself,--that matter, however conceived by us, cannot
be matter as it actually is,--our conception, though transfigured, is
not destroyed: there remains the sense of reality, dissociated as far
as possible from those special forms under which it was before
represented in thought."

This means, in plain language, that we must regard everything we know
and can know as appearance and must refer it to an unknown reality.
Sometimes Mr. Spencer calls this reality the Unknowable, sometimes he
calls it the Absolute, and sometimes he allows it to pass by a variety
of other names, such as Power, Cause, etc.  He wishes us to think of it
as "lying behind appearances" or as "underlying appearances."

Probably it has already been remarked that this Unknowable has brought
us around again to that amusing "telephone exchange" discussed in the
third chapter.  But if the reader feels within himself the least
weakness for the Unknowable, I beg him to consider carefully, before he
pins his faith to it, the following:--

(1) If we do perceive external bodies, our own bodies and others, then
it is conceivable that we may have evidence from observation to the
effect that other bodies affecting our bodies may give rise to
sensations.  In this case we cannot say that we know nothing but
sensations; we know real bodies as well as sensations, and we may refer
the sensations to the real bodies.

(2) If we do not perceive that we have bodies, and that our bodies are
acted upon by others, we have no evidence that what we call our
sensations are due to messages which come from "external things" and
are conducted along the nerves.  It is then, absurd to talk of such
"external things" as though they existed, and to call them the reality
to which sensations, as appearances, must be referred,

(3) In other words, if there is perceived to be a telephone exchange
with its wires and subscribers, we may refer the messages received to
the subscribers, and call this, if we choose, a reference of appearance
to reality.

But if there is perceived no telephone exchange, and if it is concluded
that any wires or subscribers of which it means anything to speak must
be composed of what we have heretofore called "messages," then it is
palpably absurd to refer the "messages" as a whole to subscribers not
supposed to be composed of "messages"; and it is a blunder to go on
calling the things that we know "messages," as though we had evidence
that they came from, and must be referred to, something beyond
themselves.

We must recognize that, with the general demolition of the exchange, we
lose not only known subscribers, but the very notion of a subscriber.
It will not do to try to save from this wreck some "unknowable"
subscriber, and still pin our faith to him.

(4) We have seen that the relation of appearance to reality is that of
certain experiences to certain other experiences.  When we take the
liberty of calling the Unknowable a _reality_, we blunder in our use of
the word.  The Unknowable cannot be an experience either actual,
possible, or conceived as possible, and it cannot possibly hold the
relation to any of our experiences that a real thing of any kind holds
to the appearances that stand as its signs.

(5) Finally, no man has ever made an assumption more perfectly useless
and purposeless than the assumption of the Unknowable.  We have seen
that the distinction between appearance and reality is a serviceable
one, and it has been pointed out that it would be of no service
whatever if it were not possible to refer particular appearances to
their own appropriate realities.  The realities to which we actually
refer appearances serve to explain them.  Thus, when I ask: Why do I
perceive that tree now as faint and blue and now as vivid and green?
the answer to the question is found in the notion of distance and
position in space; it is found, in other words, in a reference to the
real world of touch things, for which visual experiences serve as
signs.  Under certain circumstances, the mountain _ought_ to be robed
in its azure hue, and, under certain circumstances, it _ought not_.
The circumstances in each case are open to investigation.

Now, let us substitute for the real world of touch things, which
furnishes the explanation of given visual experiences, that philosophic
fiction, that pseudo-real nonentity, the Unknowable.  Now I perceive a
tree as faint and blue, now as bright and green; will a reference to
the Unknowable explain why the experiences differed?  Was the
Unknowable in the one instance farther off in an unknowable space, and
in the other nearer?  This, even if it means anything, must remain
unknowable.  And when the chemist puts together a volume of chlorine
gas and a volume of hydrogen gas to get two volumes of hydrochloric
acid gas, shall we explain the change which has taken place by a
reference to the Unknowable, or shall we turn to the doctrine of atoms
and their combinations?

The fact is that no man in his senses tries to account for any
individual fact by turning for an explanation to the Unknowable.  It is
a life-preserver by which some set great store, but which no man dreams
of using when he really falls into the water.

If, then, we have any reason to believe that there is a real external
world at all, we have reason to believe that we know what it is.  That
some know it imperfectly, that others know it better, and that we may
hope that some day it will be known still more perfectly, is surely no
good reason for concluding that we do not know it at all.


[1] "First Principles," Part I, Chapter IV, section 26.




CHAPTER VI

OF SPACE

23. WHAT ARE WE SUPPOSED TO KNOW ABOUT IT.--The plain man may admit
that he is not ready to hazard a definition of space, but he is
certainly not willing to admit that he is wholly ignorant of space and
of its attributes.  He knows that it is something in which material
objects have position and in which they move about; he knows that it
has not merely length, like a line, nor length and breadth, like a
surface, but has the three dimensions of length, breadth, and depth; he
knows that, except in the one circumstance of its position, every part
of space is exactly like every other part, and that, although objects
may move about in space, it is incredible that the spaces themselves
should be shifted about.

Those who are familiar with the literature of the subject know that it
has long been customary to make regarding space certain other
statements to which the plain man does not usually make serious
objection when he is introduced to them.  Thus it is said:--

(1) The idea of space is _necessary_.  We can think of objects in space
as annihilated, but we cannot conceive space to be annihilated.  We can
clear space of things, but we cannot clear away space itself, even in
thought.

(2) Space must be _infinite_.  We cannot conceive that we should come
to the end of space.

(3) Every space, however small, is _infinitely divisible_.  That is to
say, even the most minute space must be composed of spaces.  We cannot,
even theoretically, split a solid into mere surfaces, a surface into
mere lines, or a line into mere points.

Against such statements the plain man is not impelled to rise in
rebellion, for he can see that there seems to be some ground for making
them.  He can conceive of any particular material object as
annihilated, and of the place which it occupied as standing empty; but
he cannot go on and conceive of the annihilation of this bit of empty
space.  Its annihilation would not leave a gap, for a gap means a bit
of empty space; nor could it bring the surrounding spaces into
juxtaposition, for one cannot shift spaces, and, in any case, a
shifting that is not a shifting through space is an absurdity.

Again, he cannot conceive of any journey that would bring him to the
end of space.  There is no more reason for stopping at one point than
at another; why not go on?  What could end space?

As to the infinite divisibility of space, have we not, in addition to
the seeming reasonableness of the doctrine, the testimony of all the
mathematicians?  Does any one of them ever dream of a line so short
that it cannot be divided into two shorter lines, or of an angle so
small that it cannot be bisected?

24. SPACE AS NECESSARY AND SPACE AS INFINITE.--That these statements
about space contain truth one should not be in haste to deny.  It seems
silly to say that space can be annihilated, or that one can travel
"over the mountains of the moon" in the hope of reaching the end of it.
And certainly no prudent man wishes to quarrel with that coldly
rational creature the mathematician.

But it is well worth while to examine the statements carefully and to
see whether there is not some danger that they may be understood in
such a way as to lead to error.  Let us begin with the doctrine that
space is necessary and cannot be "thought away."

As we have seen above, it is manifestly impossible to annihilate in
thought a certain portion of space and leave the other portions intact.
There are many things in the same case.  We cannot annihilate in
thought one side of a door and leave the other side; we cannot rob a
man of the outside of his hat and leave him the inside.  But we can
conceive of a whole door as annihilated, and of a man as losing a whole
hat.  May we or may we not conceive of space as a whole as nonexistent?

I do not say, be it observed, can we conceive of something as attacking
and annihilating space?  Whatever space may be, we none of us think of
it as a something that may be threatened and demolished.  I only say,
may we not think of a system of things--not a world such as ours, of
course, but still a system of things of some sort--in which space
relations have no part?  May we not conceive such to be possible?

It should be remarked that space relations are by no means the only
ones in which we think of things as existing.  We attribute to them
time relations as well.  Now, when we think of occurrences as related
to each other in time, we do, in so far as we concentrate our attention
upon these relations, turn our attention away from space and
contemplate another aspect of the system of things.  Space is not such
a necessity of thought that we must keep thinking of space when we have
turned our attention to something else.  And is it, indeed,
inconceivable that there should be a system of things (not extended
things in space, of course), characterized by time relations and
perhaps other relations, but not by space relations?

It goes without saying that we cannot go on thinking of space and at
the same time not think of space.  Those who keep insisting upon space
as a necessity of thought seem to set us such a task as this, and to
found their conclusion upon our failure to accomplish it.  "We can
never represent to ourselves the nonexistence of space," says the
German philosopher Kant (1724-1804), "although we can easily conceive
that there are no objects in space."

It would, perhaps, be fairer to translate the first half of this
sentence as follows: "We can never picture to ourselves the
nonexistence of space."  Kant says we cannot make of it a
_Vorstellung_, a representation.  This we may freely admit, for what
does one try to do when one makes the effort to imagine the
nonexistence of space?  Does not one first clear space of objects, and
then try to clear space of space in much the same way?  We try to
"think space away," _i.e. to remove it from the place where it was and
yet keep that place_.

What does it mean to imagine or represent to oneself the nonexistence
of material objects?  Is it not to represent to oneself the objects as
no longer in space, _i.e._ to imagine the space as empty, as cleared of
the objects?  It means something in this case to speak of a
_Vorstellung_, or representation.  We can call before our minds the
empty space.  But if we are to think of space as nonexistent, what
shall we call before our minds?  Our procedure must not be analogous to
what it was before; we must not try to picture to our minds _the
absence of space_, as though that were in itself a something that could
be pictured; we must turn our attention to other relations, such as
time relations, and ask whether it is not conceivable that such should
be the only relations obtaining within a given system.

Those who insist upon the fact that we cannot but conceive space as
infinite employ a very similar argument to prove their point.  They set
us a self-contradictory task, and regard our failure to accomplish it
as proof of their position.  Thus, Sir William Hamilton (1788-1856)
argues: "We are altogether unable to conceive space as bounded--as
finite; that is, as a whole beyond which there is no further space."
And Herbert Spencer echoes approvingly: "We find ourselves totally
unable to imagine bounds beyond which there is no space."

Now, whatever one may be inclined to think about the infinity of space,
it is clear that this argument is an absurd one.  Let me write it out
more at length: "We are altogether unable to conceive space as
bounded--as finite; that is, as a whole _in the space_ beyond which
there is no further space."  "We find ourselves totally unable to
imagine bounds, _in the space_ beyond which there is no further space."
The words which I have added were already present implicitly.  What can
the word "beyond" mean if it does not signify space beyond?  What Sir
William and Mr. Spencer have asked us to do is to imagine a limited
space with a _beyond_ and yet _no beyond_.

There is undoubtedly some reason why men are so ready to affirm that
space is infinite, even while they admit that they do not know that the
world of material things is infinite.  To this we shall come back again
later.  But if one wishes to affirm it, it is better to do so without
giving a reason than it is to present such arguments as the above.

25. SPACE AS INFINITELY DIVISIBLE.--For more than two thousand years
men have been aware that certain very grave difficulties seem to attach
to the idea of motion, when we once admit that space is infinitely
divisible.  To maintain that we can divide any portion of space up into
ultimate elements which are not themselves spaces, and which have no
extension, seems repugnant to the idea we all have of space.  And if we
refuse to admit this possibility there seems to be nothing left to us
but to hold that every space, however small, may theoretically be
divided up into smaller spaces, and that there is no limit whatever to
the possible subdivision of spaces.  Nevertheless, if we take this most
natural position, we appear to find ourselves plunged into the most
hopeless of labyrinths, every turn of which brings us face to face with
a flat self-contradiction.

To bring the difficulties referred to clearly before our minds, let us
suppose a point to move uniformly over a line an inch long, and to
accomplish its journey in a second.  At first glance, there appears to
be nothing abnormal about this proceeding.  But if we admit that this
line is infinitely divisible, and reflect upon this property of the
line, the ground seems to sink from beneath our feet at once.

For it is possible to argue that, under the conditions given, the point
must move over one half of the line in half a second; over one half of
the remainder, or one fourth of the line, in one fourth of a second;
over one eighth of the line, in one eighth of a second, etc.  Thus the
portions of line moved over successively by the point may be
represented by the descending series:

1/2, 1/4, 1/8, 1/16, . . . [Greek omicron symbol]

Now, it is quite true that the motion of the point can be described in
a number of different ways; but the important thing to remark here is
that, if the motion really is uniform, and if the line really is
infinitely divisible, this series must, as satisfactorily as any other,
describe the motion of the point.  And it would be absurd to maintain
that _a part_ of the series can describe the whole motion.  We cannot
say, for example, that, when the point has moved over one half, one
fourth, and one eighth of the line, it has completed its motion.  If
even a single member of the series is left out, the whole line has not
been passed over; and this is equally true whether the omitted member
represent a large bit of line or a small one.

The whole series, then, represents the whole line, as definite parts of
the series represent definite parts of the line.  The line can only be
completed when the series is completed.  But when and how can this
series be completed?  In general, a series is completed when we reach
the final term, but here there appears to be no final term.  We cannot
make zero the final term, for it does not belong to the series at all.
It does not obey the law of the series, for it is not one half as large
as the term preceding it--what space is so small that dividing it by 2
gives us [omicron]?  On the other hand, some term just before zero
cannot be the final term; for if it really represents a little bit of
the line, however small, it must, by hypothesis, be made up of lesser
bits, and a smaller term must be conceivable.  There can, then, be no
last term to the series; _i.e._ what the point is doing at the very
last is absolutely indescribable; it is inconceivable that there should
be a _very last_.

It was pointed out many centuries ago that it is equally inconceivable
that there should be a _very first_.  How can a point even begin to
move along an infinitely divisible line?  Must it not before it can
move over any distance, however short, first move over half that
distance?  And before it can move over that half, must it not move over
the half of that?  Can it find something to move over that has no
halves?  And if not, how shall it even start to move?  To move at all,
it must begin somewhere; it cannot begin with what has no halves, for
then it is not moving over any part of the line, as all parts have
halves; and it cannot begin with what has halves, for that is not the
beginning.  _What does the point do first?_ that is the question.
Those who tell us about points and lines usually leave us to call upon
gentle echo for an answer.

The perplexities of this moving point seem to grow worse and worse the
longer one reflects upon them.  They do not harass it merely at the
beginning and at the end of its journey.  This is admirably brought out
by Professor W. K. Clifford (1845-1879), an excellent mathematician,
who never had the faintest intention of denying the possibility of
motion, and who did not desire to magnify the perplexities in the path
of a moving point.  He writes:--

"When a point moves along a line, we know that between any two
positions of it there is an infinite number . . . of intermediate
positions.  That is because the motion is continuous.  Each of those
positions is where the point was at some instant or other.  Between the
two end positions on the line, the point where the motion began and the
point where it stopped, there is no point of the line which does not
belong to that series.  We have thus an infinite series of successive
positions of a continuously moving point, and in that series are
included all the points of a certain piece of line-room." [1]

Thus, we are told that, when a point moves along a line, between any
two positions of it there is an infinite number of intermediate
positions.  Clifford does not play with the word "infinite"; he takes
it seriously and tells us that it means without any end: "_Infinite_;
it is a dreadful word, I know, until you find out that you are familiar
with the thing which it expresses.  In this place it means that between
any two positions there is some intermediate position; between that and
either of the others, again, there is some other intermediate; and so
on _without any end_.  Infinite means without any end."

But really, if the case is as stated, the point in question must be at
a desperate pass.  I beg the reader to consider the following, and ask
himself whether he would like to change places with it:--

(1) If the series of positions is really endless, the point must
complete one by one the members of an endless series, and reach a
nonexistent final term, for a really endless series cannot have a final
term.

(2) The series of positions is supposed to be "an infinite series of
successive positions."  The moving point must take them one after
another.  But how can it?  _Between any two positions of the point
there is an infinite number of intermediate positions_.  That is to
say, no two of these successive positions must be regarded as _next to_
each other; every position is separated from every other by an infinite
number of intermediate ones.  How, then, shall the point move?  It
cannot possibly move from one position to the next, for there is no
next.  Shall it move first to some position that is not the next?  Or
shall it in despair refuse to move at all?

Evidently there is either something wrong with this doctrine of the
infinite divisibility of space, or there is something wrong with our
understanding of it, if such absurdities as these refuse to be cleared
away.  Let us see where the trouble lies.

26. WHAT IS REAL SPACE?--It is plain that men are willing to make a
number of statements about space, the ground for making which is not at
once apparent.  It is a bold man who will undertake to say that the
universe of matter is infinite in extent.  We feel that we have the
right to ask him how he knows that it is.  But most men are ready
enough to affirm that space is and must be infinite.  How do they know
that it is?  They certainly do not directly perceive all space, and
such arguments as the one offered by Hamilton and Spencer are easily
seen to be poor proofs.

Men are equally ready to affirm that space is infinitely divisible.
Has any man ever looked upon a line and perceived directly that it has
an infinite number of parts?  Did any one ever succeed in dividing a
space up infinitely?  When we try to make clear to ourselves how a
point moves along an infinitely divisible line, do we not seem to land
in sheer absurdities?  On what sort of evidence does a man base his
statements regarding space?  They are certainly very bold statements.

A careful reflection reveals the fact that men do not speak as they do
about space for no reason at all.  When they are properly understood,
their statements can be seen to be justified, and it can be seen also
that the difficulties which we have been considering can be avoided.
The subject is a deep one, and it can scarcely be discussed
exhaustively in an introductory volume of this sort, but one can, at
least, indicate the direction in which it seems most reasonable to look
for an answer to the questions which have been raised.  How do we come
to a knowledge of space, and what do we mean by space?  This is the
problem to solve; and if we can solve this, we have the key which will
unlock many doors.

Now, we saw in the last chapter that we have reason to believe that we
know what the real external world is.  It is a world of things which we
perceive, or can perceive, or, not arbitrarily but as a result of
careful observation and deductions therefrom, conceive as though we did
perceive it--a world, say, of atoms and molecules.  It is not an
Unknowable behind or beyond everything that we perceive, or can
perceive, or conceive in the manner stated.

And the space with which we are concerned is real space, the space in
which real things exist and move about, the real things which we can
directly know or of which we can definitely know something.  In some
sense it must be given in our experience, if the things which are in
it, and are known to be in it, are given in our experience.  How must
we think of this real space?

Suppose we look at a tree at a distance.  We are conscious of a certain
complex of color.  We can distinguish the kind of color; in this case,
we call it blue.  But the quality of the color is not the only thing
that we can distinguish in the experience.  In two experiences of color
the quality may be the same, and yet the experiences may be different
from each other.  In the one case we may have more of the same
color--we may, so to speak, be conscious of a larger patch; but even if
there is not actually more of it, there may be such a difference that
we can know from the visual experience alone that the touch object
before us is, in the one case, of the one shape, and, in the other
case, of another.  Thus we may distinguish between the _stuff_ given in
our experience and the _arrangement_ of that stuff.  This is the
distinction which philosophers have marked as that between "matter" and
"form."  It is, of course, understood that both of these words, so
used, have a special sense not to be confounded with their usual one.

This distinction between "matter" and "form" obtains in all our
experiences.  I have spoken just above of the shape of the touch object
for which our visual experiences stand as signs.  What do we mean by
its shape?  To the plain man real things are the touch things of which
he has experience, and these touch things are very clearly
distinguishable from one another in shape, in size, in position, nor
are the different parts| of the things to be confounded with each
other.  Suppose that, as we pass our hand over a table, all the
sensations of touch and movement which we experience fused into an
undistinguishable mass.  Would we have any notion of size or shape?  It
is because our experiences of touch and movement do not fuse, but
remain distinguishable from each other, and we are conscious of them as
_arranged_, as constituting a system, that we can distinguish between
this part of a thing and that, this thing and that.

This arrangement, this order, of what is revealed by touch and
movement, we may call the "form" of the touch world.  Leaving out of
consideration, for the present, time relations, we may say that the
"form" of the touch world is the whole system of actual and possible
relations of arrangement between the elements which make it up.  It is
because there is such a system of relations that we can speak of things
as of this shape or of that, as great or small, as near or far, as here
or there.

Now, I ask, is there any reason to believe that, when the plain man
speaks of _space_, the word means to him anything more than this system
of actual and possible relations of arrangement among the touch things
that constitute his real world?  He may talk sometimes as though space
were some kind of a _thing_, but he does not really think of it as a
thing.

This is evident from the mere fact that he is so ready to make about it
affirmations that he would not venture to make about things.  It does
not strike him as inconceivable that a given material object should be
annihilated; it does strike him as inconceivable that a portion of
space should be blotted out of existence.  Why this difference?  Is it
not explained when we recognize that space is but a name for all the
actual and possible relations of arrangement in which things in the
touch world may stand?  We cannot drop out some of these relations and
yet keep _space_, _i.e._ the system of relations which we had before.
That this is what space means, the plain man may not recognize
explicitly, but he certainly seems to recognize it implicitly in what
he says about space.  Men are rarely inclined to admit that space is a
_thing_ of any kind, nor are they much more inclined to regard it as a
quality of a thing.  Of what could it be the quality?

And if space really were a thing of any sort, would it not be the
height of presumption for a man, in the absence of any direct evidence
from observation, to say how much there is of it--to declare it
infinite?  Men do not hesitate to say that space must be infinite.  But
when we realize that we do not mean by space merely the actual
relations which exist between the touch things that make up the world,
but also the _possible_ relations, _i.e._ that we mean the whole _plan_
of the world system, we can see that it is not unreasonable to speak of
space as infinite.

The material universe may, for aught we know, be limited in extent.
The actual space relations in which things stand to each other may not
be limitless.  But these actual space relations taken alone do not
constitute space.  Men have often asked themselves whether they should
conceive of the universe as limited and surrounded by void space.  It
is not nonsense to speak of such a state of things.  It would, indeed,
appear to be nonsense to say that, if the universe is limited, it does
not lie in void space.  What can we mean by void space but the system
of possible relations in which things, if they exist, must stand?  To
say that, beyond a certain point, no further relations are possible,
seems absurd.

Hence, when a man has come to understand what we have a right to mean
by space, it does not imply a boundless conceit on his part to hazard
the statement that space is infinite.  When he has said this, he has
said very little.  What shall we say to the statement that space is
infinitely divisible?

To understand the significance of this statement we must come back to
the distinction between appearances and the real things for which they
stand as signs, the distinction discussed at length in the last chapter.

When I see a tree from a distance, the visual experience which I have
is, as we have seen, not an indivisible unit, but is a complex
experience; it has parts, and these parts are related to each other; in
other words, it has both "matter" and "form."  It is, however, one
thing to say that this experience has parts, and it is another to say
that it has an infinite number of parts.  No man is conscious of
perceiving an infinite number of parts in the patch of color which
represents to him a tree at a distance; to say that it is constituted
of such strikes us in our moments of sober reflection as a monstrous
statement.

Now, this visual experience is to us the sign of the reality, the real
tree; it is not taken as the tree itself.  When we speak of the size,
the shape, the number of parts, of the tree, we do not have in mind the
size, the shape, the number of parts, of just this experience.  We pass
from the sign to the thing signified, and we may lay our hand upon this
thing, thus gaining a direct experience of the size and shape of the
touch object.

We must recognize, however, that just as no man is conscious of an
infinite number of parts in what he sees, so no man is conscious of an
infinite number of parts in what he touches.  He who tells me that,
when I pass my finger along my paper cutter, _what I perceive_ has an
infinite number of parts, tells me what seems palpably untrue.  When an
object is very small, I can see it, and I cannot see that it is
composed of parts; similarly, when an object is very small, I can feel
it with my finger, but I cannot distinguish its parts by the sense of
touch.  There seem to be limits beyond which I cannot go in either case.

Nevertheless, men often speak of thousandths of an inch, or of
millionths of an inch, or of distances even shorter.  Have such
fractions of the magnitudes that we do know and can perceive any real
existence?  The touch world of real things as it is revealed in our
experience does not appear to be divisible into such; it does not
appear to be divisible even so far, and much less does it appear to be
infinitely divisible.

But have we not seen that the touch world given in our experience must
be taken by the thoughtful man as itself the sign or appearance of a
reality more ultimate?  The speck which appears to the naked eye to
have no parts is seen under the microscope to have parts; that is to
say, an experience apparently not extended has become the sign of
something that is seen to have part out of part.  We have as yet
invented no instrument that will make directly perceptible to the
finger tip an atom of hydrogen or of oxygen, but the man of science
conceives of these little things as though they could be perceived.
They and the space in which they move--the system of actual and
possible relations between them--seem to be related to the world
revealed in touch very much as the space revealed in the field of the
microscope is related to the space of the speck looked at with the
naked eye.

Thus, when the thoughtful man speaks of _real space_, he cannot mean by
the word only the actual and possible relations of arrangement among
the things and the parts of things directly revealed to his sense of
touch.  He may speak of real things too small to be thus perceived, and
of their motion as through spaces too small to be perceptible at all.
What limit shall he set to the possible subdivision of _real_ things?
Unless he can find an ultimate reality which cannot in its turn become
the appearance or sign of a further reality, it seems absurd to speak
of a limit at all.

We may, then, say that real space is infinitely divisible.  By this
statement we should mean that certain experiences may be represented by
others, and that we may carry on our division in the case of the
latter, when a further subdivision of the former seems out of the
question.  But it should not mean that any single experience furnished
us by any sense, or anything that we can represent in the imagination,
is composed of an infinite number of parts.

When we realize this, do we not free ourselves from the difficulties
which seemed to make the motion of a point over a line an impossible
absurdity?  The line as revealed in a single experience either of sight
or of touch is not composed of an infinite number of parts.  It is
composed of points seen or touched--least experiences of sight or
touch, _minima sensibilia_.  These are next to each other, and the
point, in moving, takes them one by one.

But such a single experience is not what we call a line.  It is but one
experience of a line.  Though the experience is not infinitely
divisible, the line may be.  This only means that the visual or tactual
point of the single experience may stand for, may represent, what is
not a mere point but has parts, and is, hence, divisible.  Who can set
a limit to such possible substitutions? in other words, who can set a
limit to the divisibility of a _real line_?

It is only when we confuse the single experience with the real line
that we fall into absurdities.  What the mathematician tells us about
real points and real lines has no bearing on the constitution of the
single experience and its parts.  Thus, when he tells us that between
any two points on a line there are an infinite number of other points,
he only means that we may expand the line indefinitely by the system of
substitutions described above.  We do this for ourselves within limits
every time that we approach from a distance a line drawn on a
blackboard.  The mathematician has generalized our experience for us,
and that is all he has done.  We should try to get at his real meaning,
and not quote him as supporting an absurdity.


[1] "Seeing and Thinking," p. 149.




CHAPTER VII

OF TIME

27. TIME AS NECESSARY, INFINITE, AND INFINITELY DIVISIBLE.--Of course, we
all know something about time; we know it as past, present, and future;
we know it as divisible into parts, all of which are successive; we know
that whatever happens must happen in time.  Those who have thought a good
deal about the matter are apt to tell us that time is a necessity of
thought, we cannot but think it; that time is and must be infinite; and
that it is infinitely divisible.

These are the same statements that were made regarding space, and, as
they have to be criticised in just the same way, it is not necessary to
dwell upon them at great length.  However, we must not pass them over
altogether.

As to the statement that time is a _necessary_ idea, we may freely admit
that we cannot in thought _annihilate_ time, or _think it away_.  It does
not seem to mean anything to attempt such a task.  Whatever time may be,
it does not appear to be a something of such a nature that we can
demolish it or clear it away from something else.  But is it necessarily
absurd to speak of a system of things--not, of course, a system of things
in which there is change, succession, an earlier and a later, but still a
system of things of some sort--in which there obtain no time relations?
The problem is, to be sure, one of theoretical interest merely, for such
a system of things is not the world we know.

And as for the infinity of time, may we not ask on what ground any one
ventures to assert that time is infinite?  No man can say that infinite
time is directly given in his experience.  If one does not directly
perceive it to be infinite, must one not seek for some proof of the fact?
The only proof which appears to be offered us is contained in the
statement that we cannot conceive of a time before which there was no
time, nor of a time after which there will be no time; a proof which is
no proof, for written out at length it reads as follows: we cannot
conceive of a time _in the time_ before which there was no time, nor of a
time _in the time_ after which there will be no time.  As well say: We
cannot conceive of a number the number before which was no number, nor of
a number the number after which will be no number.  Whatever may be said
for the conclusion arrived at, the argument is a very poor one.

When we turn to the consideration of time as infinitely divisible, we
seem to find ourselves confronted with the same difficulties which
presented themselves when we thought of space as infinitely divisible.
Certainly no man was immediately conscious of an infinite number of parts
in the minute which just slipped by.  Shall he assert that it did,
nevertheless, contain an infinite number of parts?  Then how did it
succeed in passing? how did it even _begin_ to pass away?  It is
infinitely divisible, that is, there is no end to the number of parts
into which it may be divided; those parts and parts of parts are all
successive, no two can pass at once, they must all do it in a certain
order, one after the other.

Thus, something must pass _first_.  What can it be?  If that something
has parts, is divisible, the whole of it cannot pass first.  It must
itself pass bit by bit, as must the whole minute; and if it is infinitely
divisible we have precisely the problem that we had at the outset.
Whatever passes first cannot, then, have parts.

Let us assume that it has no parts, and bid it Godspeed!  Has the minute
begun?  Our minute is, by hypothesis, infinitely divisible; it is
composed of parts, and those parts of other parts, and so on without end.
We cannot by subdivision come to any part which is itself not composed of
smaller parts.  The partless thing that passed, then, is no part of the
minute.  That is all still waiting at the gate, and no member of its
troop can prove that it has a right to lead the rest.  In the same outer
darkness is waiting the point on the line that misbehaved itself in the
last chapter.

28. THE PROBLEM OF PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE.--It seems bad enough to
have on our hands a minute which must pass away in successive bits, and
to discover that no bit of it can possibly pass first.  But if we follow
with approval the reflections of certain thinkers, we may find ourselves
at such a pass that we would be glad to be able to prove that we may have
on our hands a minute of any sort.  Men sometimes are so bold as to
maintain that they know time to be infinite; would it not be well for
them to prove first that they can know time at all?

The trouble is this; as was pointed out long ago by Saint Augustine
(354-430) in his famous "Confessions," [1] the parts of time are
successive, and of the three divisions, past, present, and future, only
one can be regarded as existing: "Those two times, past and future, how
can they be, when the past is not now, and the future is not yet?"  The
present is, it seems, the only existent; how long is the present?

"Even a single hour passes in fleeting moments; as much of it as has
taken flight is past, what remains is future.  If we can comprehend any
time that is divisible into no parts at all, or perhaps into the minutest
parts of moments, this alone let us call present; yet this speeds so
hurriedly from the future to the past that it does not endure even for a
little space.  If it has duration, it is divided into a past and a
future; but the present has no duration.

"Where, then, is the time that we may call long?  Is it future?  We do
not say of the future: it _is_ long; for as yet there exists nothing to
be long.  We say: it _will be_ long.  But when?  If while yet future it
will not be long, for nothing will yet exist to be long.  And if it will
be long, when, from a future as yet nonexistent, it has become a present,
and has begun to be, that it may be something that is long, then present
time cries out in the words of the preceding paragraph that it cannot be
long."

Augustine's way of presenting the difficulty is a quaint one, but the
problem is as real at the beginning of the twentieth century as it was at
the beginning of the fifth.  Past time does not exist now, future time
does not exist yet, and present time, it seems, has no duration.  Can a
man be said to be conscious of time as past, present, and future?  Who
can be conscious of the nonexistent?  And the existent is not _time_, it
has no duration, there is no before and after in a mere limiting point.

Augustine's way out of the difficulty is the suggestion that, although we
cannot, strictly speaking, measure time, we can measure _memory_ and
_expectation_.  Before he begins to repeat a psalm, his expectation
extends over the whole of it.  After a little a part of it must be
referred to expectation and a part of it to memory.  Finally, the whole
psalm is "extended along" the memory.  We can measure this, at least.

But how is the psalm in question "extended along" the memory or the
expectation?  Are the parts of it successive, or do they thus exist
simultaneously?  If everything in the memory image exists at once, if all
belongs to the punctual present, to the mere point that divides past from
future, how can a man get from it a consciousness of time, of a something
whose parts cannot exist together but must follow each other?

Augustine appears to overlook the fact that on his own hypothesis, the
present, the only existent, the only thing a man can be conscious of, is
an indivisible instant.  In such there can be no change; the man who is
shut up to such cannot be aware that the past is growing and the future
diminishing.  Any such change as this implies at least two instants, an
earlier and a later.  He who has never experienced a change of any sort,
who has never been conscious of the relation of earlier and later, of
succession, cannot think of the varied content of memory as of _that
which has been present_.  It cannot mean to him what memory certainly
means to us; he cannot be conscious of a past, a present, and a future.
To extract the notion of time, of past, present, and future, from an
experience which contains no element of succession, from an indivisible
instant, is as hopeless a task as to extract a line from a mathematical
point.

It appears, then, that, if we are to be conscious of time at all, if we
are to have the least conception of it, we must have some direct
experience of change.  We cannot really be shut up to that punctual
present, that mere point or limit between past and future, that the
present has been described as being.  But does this not imply that we can
be directly conscious of what is not present, that we can _now_ perceive
what does _not now_ exist?  How is this possible?

It is not easy for one whose reading has been somewhat limited in any
given field to see the full significance of the problems which present
themselves in that field.  Those who read much in the history of modern
philosophy will see that this ancient difficulty touching our
consciousness of time has given rise to some exceedingly curious
speculations, and some strange conclusions touching the nature of the
mind.

Thus, it has been argued that, since the experience of each moment is
something quite distinct from the experience of the next, a something
that passes away to give place to its successor, we cannot explain the
consciousness of time, of a whole in which successive moments are
recognized as having their appropriate place, unless we assume a
something that knows each moment and knits it, so to speak, to its
successor.  This something is the self or consciousness, which is
independent of time, and does not exist in time, as do the various
experiences that fill the successive moments.  It is assumed to be
_timelessly_ present _at all times_, and thus to connect the nonexistent
past with the existent present.

I do not ask the reader to try to make clear to himself how anything can
be timelessly present at all times, for I do not believe that the words
can be made to represent any clear thought whatever.  Nor do I ask him to
try to conceive how this timeless something can join past and present.  I
merely wish to point out that these modern speculations, which still
influence the minds of many distinguished men, have their origin in a
difficulty which suggested itself early in the history of reflective
thought, and are by no means to be regarded as a gratuitous and useless
exercise of the ingenuity.  They are serious attempts to solve a real
problem, though they may be unsuccessful ones, and they are worthy of
attention even from those who incline to a different solution.

29. WHAT IS REAL TIME?--From the thin air of such speculations as we have
been discussing let us come back to the world of the plain man, the world
in which we all habitually live.  It is from this that we must start out
upon all our journeys, and it is good to come back to it from time to
time to make sure of our bearings.

We have seen (Chapter V) that we distinguish between the real and the
apparent, and that we recognize as the real world the objects revealed to
the sense of touch.  These objects stand to each other in certain
relations of arrangement; that is to say, they exist in space.  And just
as we may distinguish between the object as it appears and the object as
it is, so we may distinguish between apparent space and real space,
_i.e._ between the relations of arrangement, actual and possible, which
obtain among the parts of the object as it appears, and those which
obtain among the parts of the object as it really is.

But our experience does not present us only with objects in space
relations; it presents us with a succession of changes in those objects.
And if we will reason about those changes as we have reasoned about space
relations, many of our difficulties regarding the nature of time may, as
it seems, be made to disappear.

Thus we may recognize that we are directly conscious of duration, of
succession, and may yet hold that this crude and immediate experience of
duration is not what we mean by real time.  Every one distinguishes
between apparent time and real time now and then.  We all know that a
sermon may _seem _long and not _be_ long; that the ten years that we live
over in a dream are not ten real years; that the swallowing of certain
drugs may be followed by the illusion of the lapse of vast spaces of
time, when really very little time has elapsed.  What is this _real_ time?

It is nothing else than the order of the changes which take place or may
take place in real things.  In the last chapter I spoke of space as the
"form" of the real world; it would be better to call it _a_ "form" of the
real world, and to give the same name also to time.

It is very clear that, when we inquire concerning the real time of any
occurrence, or ask how long a series of such lasted, we always look for
our answer to something that has happened in the external world.  The
passage of a star over the meridian, the position of the sun above the
horizon, the arc which the moon has described since our last observation,
the movement of the hands of a clock, the amount of sand which has fallen
in the hourglass, these things and such as these are the indicators of
real time.  There may be indicators of a different sort; we may decide
that it is noon because we are hungry, or midnight because we are tired;
we may argue that the preacher must have spoken more than an hour because
he quite wore out the patience of the congregation.  These are more or
less uncertain signs of the lapse of time, but they cannot be regarded as
experiences of the passing of time either apparent or real.

Thus, we see that real space and real time are the _plan_ of the world
system.  They are not _things_ of any sort, and they should not be
mistaken for things.  They are not known independently of things, though,
when we have once had an experience of things and their changes, we can
by abstraction from the things themselves fix our attention upon their
arrangement and upon the order of their changes.  We can divide and
subdivide spaces and times without much reference to the things.  But we
should never forget that it would never have occurred to us to do this,
indeed, that the whole procedure would be absolutely meaningless to us,
were not a real world revealed in our experience as it is.

He who has attained to this insight into the nature of time is in a
position to offer what seem to be satisfactory solutions to the problems
which have been brought forward above.

(1) He can see, thus, why it is absurd to speak of any portion of time as
becoming nonexistent.  Time is nothing else than an order, a great system
of relations.  One cannot drop out certain of these and leave the rest
unchanged, for the latter imply the former.  Day-after-to-morrow would
not be day-after-to-morrow, if to-morrow did not lie between it and
to-day.  To speak of dropping out to-morrow and leaving it the time it
was conceived to be is mere nonsense.

(2) He can see why it does not indicate a measureless conceit for a man
to be willing to say that time is infinite.  One who says this need not
be supposed to be acquainted with the whole past and future history of
the real world, of which time is an aspect.  We constantly abstract from
things, and consider only the order of their changes, and in this order
itself there is no reason why one should set a limit at some point;
indeed, to set such a limit seems a gratuitous absurdity.  He who says
that time is infinite does not say much; he is not affirming the
existence of some sort of a thing; he is merely affirming a theoretical
possibility, and is it not a theoretical possibility that there may be an
endless succession of real changes in a real world?

(3) It is evident, furthermore, that, when one has grasped firmly the
significance of the distinction between apparent time and real time, one
may with a clear conscience speak of time as infinitely divisible.  Of
course, the time directly given in any single experience, the minute or
the second of which we are conscious as it passes, cannot be regarded as
composed of an infinite number of parts.  We are not directly conscious
of these subdivisions, and it is a monstrous assumption to maintain that
they must be present in the minute or second as perceived.

But no such single experience of duration constitutes what we mean by
real time.  We have seen that real time is the time occupied by the
changes in real things, and the question is, How far can one go in the
subdivision of this time?

Now, the touch thing which usually is for us in common life the real
thing is not the real thing for science; it is the appearance under which
the real world of atoms and molecules reveals itself.  The atom is not
directly perceivable, and we may assign to its motions a space so small
that no one could possibly perceive it as space, as a something with part
out of part, a something with a here and a there.  But, as has been
before pointed out (section 26), this does not prevent us from believing
the atom and the space in which it moves to be real, and we can
_represent_ them to ourselves as we can the things and the spaces with
which we have to do in common life.

It is with time just as it is with space.  We can perceive an inch to
have parts; we cannot perceive a thousandth of an inch to have parts, if
we can perceive it at all; but we can represent it to ourselves as
extended, that is, we can let an experience which is extended stand for
it, and can dwell upon the parts of that.  We can perceive a second to
have duration; we cannot perceive a thousandth of a second to have
duration; but we can conceive it as having duration, _i.e._ we can let
some experience of duration stand for it and serve as its representative.

It is, then, reasonable to speak of the space covered by the vibration of
an atom, and it is equally reasonable to speak of the time taken up by
its vibration.  It is not necessary to believe that the duration that we
actually experience as a second must itself be capable of being divided
up into the number of parts indicated by the denominator of the fraction
that we use in indicating such a time, and that each of these parts must
be perceived as duration.

There is, then, a sense in which we may affirm that time is infinitely
divisible.  But we must remember that apparent time--the time presented
in any single experience of duration--is never infinitely divisible; and
that real time, in any save a relative sense of the word, is not a single
experience of duration at all.  It is a recognition of the fact that
experiences of duration may be substituted for each other without
assignable limit.

(4) But what shall we say to the last problem--to the question how we can
be conscious of time at all, when the parts of time are all successive?
How can we even have a consciousness of "crude" time, of apparent time,
of duration in any sense of the word, when duration must be made up of
moments no two of which can exist together and no one of which alone can
constitute time?  The past is not now, the future is not yet, the present
is a mere point, as we are told, and cannot have parts.  If we are
conscious of time as past, present, and future, must we not be conscious
of a series as a series when every member of it save one is nonexistent?
Can a man be conscious of the nonexistent?

The difficulty does seem a serious one, and yet I venture to affirm that,
if we examine it carefully, we shall see that it is a difficulty of our
own devising.  The argument quietly makes an assumption--and makes it
gratuitously--with which any consciousness of duration is incompatible,
and then asks us how there can be such a thing as a consciousness of
duration.

The assumption is that _we can be conscious only of the existent_, and
this, written out a little more at length, reads as follows: _we can be
conscious only of the now existent_, or, in other words _of the present_.
Of course, this determines from the outset that we cannot be conscious of
the past and the future, of duration.

The past and the future are, to be sure, nonexistent from the point of
view of the present; but it should be remarked as well that the present
is nonexistent from the point of view of the past or the future.  If we
are talking of time at all we are talking of that no two parts of which
are simultaneous; it would be absurd to speak of a past that existed
simultaneously with the present, just as it would be absurd to speak of a
present existing simultaneously with the past.  But we should not deny to
past, present, and future, respectively, their appropriate existence; nor
is it by any means self-evident that there cannot be a consciousness of
past, present, and future as such.

We fall in with the assumption, it seems, because we know very well that
we are not directly conscious of a remote past and a remote future.  We
represent these to ourselves by means of some proxy--we have present
memories of times long past and present anticipations of what will be in
the time to come.  Moreover, we use the word "present" very loosely; we
say the present year, the present day, the present hour, the present
minute, or the present second.  When we use the word thus loosely, there
seems no reason for believing that there should be such a thing as a
direct consciousness that extends beyond the present.  It appears
reasonable to say: No one can be conscious save of the present.

It should be remembered, however, that the generous present of common
discourse is by no means identical with the ideal point between past and
future dealt with in the argument under discussion.  We all say: I now
see that the cloud is moving; I now see that the snow is falling.  But
there can be no moving, no falling, no change, in the timeless "now" with
which we have been concerned.  Is there any evidence whatever that we are
shut up, for all our immediate knowledge, to such a "now"?  There is none
whatever.

The fact is that this timeless "now" is a product of reflective thought
and not a something of which we are directly conscious.  It is an ideal
point in the real time of which this chapter has treated, the time that
is in a certain sense infinitely divisible.  It is first cousin to the
ideal mathematical point, the mere limit between two lines, a something
not perceptible to any sense.  We have a tendency to carry over to it
what we recognize to be true of the very different present of common
discourse, a present which we distinguish from past and future in a
somewhat loose way, but a present in which there certainly is the
consciousness of change, of duration.  And when we do this, we dig for
ourselves a pit into which we proceed to fall.

We may, then, conclude that we are directly conscious of more than the
present, in the sense in which Augustine used the word.  We are conscious
of _time_, of "crude" time, and from this we can pass to a knowledge of
real time, and can determine its parts with precision.


[1] Book XI, Chapters 14 and 15.




III. PROBLEMS TOUCHING THE MIND


CHAPTER VIII

WHAT IS THE MIND?

30. PRIMITIVE NOTIONS OF MIND.--The soul or mind, that something to
which we refer sensations and ideas of all sorts, is an object that men
do not seem to know very clearly and definitely, though they feel so
sure of its existence that they regard it as the height of folly to
call it in question.  That he has a mind, no man doubts; what his mind
is, he may be quite unable to say.

We have seen (section 7) that children, when quite young, can hardly be
said to recognize that they have minds at all.  This does not mean that
what is mental is not given in their experience.  They know that they
must open their eyes to see things, and must lay their hands upon them
to feel them; they have had pains and pleasures, memories and fancies.
In short, they have within their reach all the materials needed in
framing a conception of the mind, and in drawing clearly the
distinction between their minds and external things.  Nevertheless,
they are incapable of using these materials; their attention is
engrossed with what is physical,--with their own bodies and the bodies
of others, with the things that they can eat, with the toys with which
they can play, and the like.  It is only later that there emerges even
a tolerably clear conception of a self or mind different from the
physical and contrasted with it.

Primitive man is almost as material in his thinking as is the young
child.  Of this we have traces in many of the words which have come to
be applied to the mind.  Our word "spirit" is from the Latin
_spiritus_, originally a breeze.  The Latin word for the soul, the word
used by the great philosophers all through the Middle Ages, _anima_
(Greek, anemos), has the same significance.  In the Greek New
Testament, the word used for spirit (pneuma) carries a similar
suggestion.  When we are told in the Book of Genesis that "man became a
living soul," we may read the word literally "a breath."

What more natural than that the man who is just awakening to a
consciousness of that elusive entity the mind should confuse it with
that breath which is the most striking outward and visible sign that
distinguishes a living man from a dead one?

That those who first tried to give some scientific account of the soul
or mind conceived it as a material thing, and that it was sufficiently
common to identify it with the breath, we know from direct evidence.  A
glance at the Greek philosophy, to which we owe so much that is of
value in our intellectual life, is sufficient to disclose how difficult
it was for thinking men to attain to a higher conception.

Thus, Anaximenes of Miletus, who lived in the sixth century before
Christ, says that "our soul, which is air, rules us."  A little later,
Heraclitus, a man much admired for the depth of his reflections,
maintains that the soul is a fiery vapor, evidently identifying it with
the warm breath of the living creature.  In the fifth century, B.C.,
Anaxagoras, who accounts for the ordering of the elements into a system
of things by referring to the activity of Mind or Reason, calls mind
"the finest of things," and it seems clear that he did not conceive of
it as very different in nature from the other elements which enter into
the constitution of the world.

Democritus of Abdera (between 460 and 360 B.C.), that great
investigator of nature and brilliant writer, developed a materialistic
doctrine that admits the existence of nothing save atoms and empty
space.  He conceived the soul to consist of fine, smooth, round atoms,
which are also atoms of fire.  These atoms are distributed through the
whole body, but function differently in different places--in the brain
they give us thought, in the heart, anger, and in the liver, desire.
Life lasts just so long as we breathe in and breathe out such atoms.

The doctrine of Democritus was taken up by Epicurus, who founded his
school three hundred years before Christ--a school which lived and
prospered for a very long time.  Those who are interested in seeing how
a materialistic psychology can be carried out in detail by an ingenious
mind should read the curious account of the mind presented in his great
poem, "On Nature," by the Roman poet Lucretius, an ardent Epicurean,
who wrote in the first century B.C.

The school which we commonly think of contrasting with the Epicurean,
and one which was founded at about the same time, is that of the
Stoics.  Certainly the Stoics differed in many things from the
Epicureans; their view of the world, and of the life of man, was a much
nobler one; but they were uncompromising materialists, nevertheless,
and identified the soul with the warm breath that animates man.

31. THE MIND AS IMMATERIAL.--It is scarcely too much to say that the
Greek philosophy as a whole impresses the modern mind as representing
the thought of a people to whom it was not unnatural to think of the
mind as being a breath, a fire, a collection of atoms, a something
material.  To be sure, we cannot accuse those twin stars that must ever
remain the glory of literature and science, Plato and Aristotle, of
being materialists.  Plato (427-347, B.C.) distributes, it is true, the
three-fold soul, which he allows man, in various parts of the human
body, in a way that at least suggests the Democritean distribution of
mind-atoms.  The lowest soul is confined beneath the diaphragm; the one
next in rank has its seat in the chest; and the highest, the rational
soul, is enthroned in the head.  However, he has said quite enough
about this last to indicate clearly that he conceived it to be free
from all taint of materiality.

As for Aristotle (384-322, B.C.),  who also distinguished between the
lower psychical functions and the higher, we find him sometimes
speaking of soul and body in such a way as to lead men to ask
themselves whether he is really speaking of two things at all; but when
he specifically treats of the _nous_ or reason, he insists upon its
complete detachment from everything material.  Man's reason is not
subjected to the fate of the lower psychical functions, which, as the
"form" of the body, perish with the body; it enters from without, and
it endures after the body has passed away.  It is interesting to note,
however, an occasional lapse even in Aristotle.  When he comes to speak
of the relation to the world of the Divine Mind, the First Cause of
Motion, which he conceives as pure Reason, he represents it as
_touching_ the world, although it remains itself _untouched_.  We seem
to find here just a flavor--an inconsistent one--of the material.

Such reflections as those of Plato and Aristotle bore fruit in later
ages.  When we come down to Plotinus the Neo-Platonist (204-269, A.D.),
we have left the conception of the soul as a warm breath, or as
composed of fine round atoms, far behind.  It has become curiously
abstract and incomprehensible.  It is described as an immaterial
substance  This substance is, in a sense, in the body, or, at least, it
is present to the body.  But it is not in the body as material things
are in this place or in that.  _It is as a whole in the whole body, and
it is as a whole in every part of the body_.  Thus the soul may be
regarded as divisible, since it is distributed throughout the body; but
it must also be regarded as indivisible, since it is wholly in every
part.

Let the man to whom such sentences as these mean anything rejoice in
the meaning that he is able to read into them!  If he can go as far as
Plotinus, perhaps he can go as far as Cassiodorus (477-570, A.D.), and
maintain that the soul is not merely as a whole in every part of the
body, but is wholly in each of its own parts.

Upon reading such statements one's first impulse is to exclaim: How is
it possible that men of sense should be led to speak in this
irresponsible way? and when they do speak thus, is it conceivable that
other men should seriously occupy themselves with what they say?

But if one has the historic sense, and knows something of the setting
in which such doctrines come to the birth, one cannot regard it as
remarkable that men of sense should urge them.  No one coins them
independently out of his own brain; little by little men are impelled
along the path that leads to such conclusions.  Plotinus was a careful
student of the philosophers that preceded him.  He saw that mind must
be distinguished from matter, and he saw that what is given a location
in space, in the usual sense of the words, is treated like a material
thing.  On the other hand, he had the common experience that we all
have of a relation between mind and body.  How do justice to this
relation, and yet not materialize mind?

What he tried to do is clear, and it seems equally clear that he had
good reason for trying to do it.  But it appears to us now that what he
actually did was to make of the mind or soul a something very like an
inconsistent bit of matter, that is somehow in space, and yet not
exactly in space, a something that can be in two places at once, a
logical monstrosity.  That his doctrine did not meet with instant
rejection was due to the fact, already alluded to, that our experience
of the mind is something rather dim and elusive.  It is not easy for a
man to say what it is, and, hence, it is not easy for a man to say what
it is not.

The doctrine of Plotinus passed over to Saint Augustine, and from him
it passed to the philosophers of the Middle Ages.  How extremely
difficult it has been for the world to get away from it at all, is made
clearly evident in the writings of that remarkable man Descartes.

Descartes wrote in the seventeenth century.  The long sleep of the
Middle Ages was past, and the several sciences had sprung into a
vigorous and independent life.  It was not enough for Descartes to
describe the relation of mind and body in the loose terms that had
prevailed up to his time.  He had made a careful study of anatomy, and
he realized that the brain is a central organ to which messages are
carried by the nerves from all parts of the body.  He knew that an
injury to the nerve might prevent the receipt of a message, _i.e._ he
knew that a conscious sensation did not come into being until something
happened in the brain.

Nor was he content merely to refer the mind to the brain in a general
way.  He found the "little pineal gland" in the midst of the brain to
be in what he regarded as an admirable position to serve as the seat of
the soul.  To this convenient little central office he relegated it;
and he describes in a way that may to-day well provoke a smile the
movements that the soul imparts to the pineal gland, making it incline
itself in this direction and in that, and making it push the "animal
spirits," the fluid contained in the cavities of the brain, towards
various "pores."

Thus he writes:[1] "Let us, then, conceive of the soul as having her
chief seat in the little gland that is in the middle of the brain,
whence she radiates to all the rest of the body by means of the
spirits, the nerves, and even the blood, which, participating in the
impressions of the spirits, can carry them through the arteries to all
the members."  And again: "Thus, when the soul wills to call anything
to remembrance, this volition brings it about that the gland, inclining
itself successively in different directions, pushes the spirits towards
divers parts of the brain, until they find the part which has the
traces that the object which one wishes to recollect has left there."

We must admit that Descartes' scientific studies led him to make this
mind that sits in the little pineal gland something very material.  It
is spoken of as though it pushed the gland about; it is affected by the
motions of the gland, as though it were a bit of matter.  It seems to
be a less inconsistent thing than the "all in the whole body" soul of
Plotinus; but it appears to have purchased its comprehensibility at the
expense of its immateriality.

Shall we say that Descartes frankly repudiated the doctrine that had
obtained for so many centuries?  We cannot say that; he still held to
it.  But how could he?  The reader has perhaps remarked above that he
speaks of the soul as having her _chief_ seat in the pineal gland.  It
seems odd that he should do so, but he still held, even after he had
come to his definite conclusions as to the soul's seat, to the ancient
doctrine that the soul is united to all the parts of the body
"conjointly."  He could not wholly repudiate a venerable tradition.

We have seen, thus, that men first conceived of the mind as material
and later came to rebel against such a conception.  But we have seen,
also, that the attempt to conceive it as immaterial was not wholly
successful.  It resulted in a something that we may describe as
inconsistently material rather than as not material at all.

32. MODERN COMMON SENSE NOTIONS OF THE MIND.--Under this heading I mean
to sum up the opinions as to the nature of the mind usually held by the
intelligent persons about us to-day who make no claim to be regarded as
philosophers.  Is it not true that a great many of them believe:--

(1) That the mind is in the body?

(2) That it acts and reacts with matter?

(3) That it is a substance with attributes?

(4) That it is nonextended and immaterial?

I must remark at the outset that this collection of opinions is by no
means something gathered by the plain man from his own experience.
These opinions are the echoes of old philosophies.  They are a heritage
from the past, and have become the common property of all intelligent
persons who are even moderately well-educated.  Their sources have been
indicated in the preceding sections; but most persons who cherish them
have no idea of their origin.

Men are apt to suppose that these opinions seem reasonable to them
merely for the reason that they find in their own experience evidence
of their truth.  But this is not so.

Have we not seen above how long it took men to discover that they must
not think of the mind as being a breath, or a flame, or a collection of
material atoms?  The men who erred in this way were abler than most of
us can pretend to be, and they gave much thought to the matter.  And
when at last it came to be realized that mind must not thus be
conceived as material, those who endeavored to conceive it as something
else gave, after their best efforts, a very queer account of it indeed.

Is it in the face of such facts reasonable to suppose that our friends
and acquaintances, who strike us as having reflective powers in nowise
remarkable, have independently arrived at the conception that the mind
is a nonextended and immaterial substance?  Surely they have not
thought all this out for themselves.  They have taken up and
appropriated unconsciously notions which were in the air, so to speak.
They have inherited their doctrines, not created them.  It is well to
remember this, for it may make us the more willing to take up and
examine impartially what we have uncritically turned into articles of
belief.

The first two articles, namely, that the mind is in the body and that
it acts upon, and is acted upon by, material things, I shall discuss at
length in the next chapter.  Here I pause only to point out that the
plain man does not put the mind into the body quite unequivocally.  I
think it would surprise him to be told that a line might be drawn
through two heads in such a way as to transfix two minds.  And I
remark, further, that he has no clear idea of what it means for mind to
act upon body or body to act upon mind.  How does an immaterial thing
set a material thing in motion?  Can it touch it?  Can it push it?
Then what does it do?

But let us pass on to the last two articles of faith mentioned above.

We all draw the distinction between _substance_ and its _attributes_ or
_qualities_.  The distinction was remarked and discussed many centuries
ago, and much has been written upon it.  I take up the ruler on my
desk; it is recognized at once as a bit of wood.  How?  It has such and
such qualities.  My paper-knife is of silver.  How do I know it?  It
has certain other qualities.  I speak of my mind.  How do I know that I
have a mind?  I have sensations and ideas.  If I experienced no mental
phenomena of any sort, evidence of the existence of a mind would be
lacking.

Now, whether I am concerned with the ruler, with the paper-knife, or
with the mind, have I direct evidence of the existence of anything more
than the whole group of qualities?  Do I ever perceive the substance?

In the older philosophy, the substance (_substantia_) was conceived to
be a something not directly perceived, but only inferred to exist--a
something underlying the qualities of things and, as it were, holding
them together.  It was believed in by philosophers who were quite ready
to admit that they could not tell anything about it.  For example, John
Locke (1632-1704), the English philosopher, holds to it stoutly, and
yet describes it as a mere "we know not what," whose function it is to
hold together the bundles of qualities that constitute the things we
know.

In the modern philosophy men still distinguish between substance and
qualities.  It is a useful distinction, and we could scarcely get on
without it.  But an increasing number of thoughtful persons repudiate
the old notion of substance altogether.

We may, they say, understand by the word "substance" the whole group of
qualities _as a group_--not merely the qualities that are revealed at a
given time, but all those that we have reason to believe a fuller
knowledge would reveal.  In short, we may understand by it just what is
left when the "we know not what" of the Lockian has been discarded.

This notion of substance we may call the more modern one; yet we can
hardly say that it is the notion of the plain man.  He does not make
very clear to himself just what is in his thought, but I think we do
him no injustice in maintaining that he is something of a Lockian, even
if he has never heard of Locke.  The Lockian substance is, as the
reader has seen, a sort of "unknowable."

And now for the doctrine that the mind is nonextended and immaterial.
With these affirmations we may heartily agree; but we must admit that
the plain man enunciates them without having a very definite idea of
what the mind is.

He regards as in his mind all his sensations and ideas, all his
perceptions and mental images of things.  Now, suppose I close my eyes
and picture to myself a barber's pole.  Where is the image?  We say, in
the mind.  Is it extended?  We feel impelled to answer, No.  But it
certainly _seems_ to be extended; the white and the red upon it appear
undeniably side by side.  May I assert that this mental image has no
extension whatever?  Must I deny to it _parts_, or assert that its
parts are not side by side?

It seems odd to maintain that a something as devoid of parts as is a
mathematical point should yet appear to have parts and to be extended.
On the other hand, if we allow the image to be extended, how can we
refer it to a nonextended mind?

To such questions as these, I do not think that the plain man has an
answer.  That they can be answered, I shall try to show in the last
section of this chapter.  But one cannot answer them until one has
attained to rather a clear conception of what is meant by the mind.

And until one has attained to such a conception, the statement that the
mind is immaterial must remain rather vague and indefinite.  As we saw
above, even the Plotinic soul was inconsistently material rather than
immaterial.  It was not excluded from space; it was referred to space
in an absurd way.  The mind as common sense conceives it, is the
successor of this Plotinic soul, and seems to keep a flavor of what is
material after all.  This will come out in the next chapter, where we
shall discuss mind and body.

33. THE PSYCHOLOGIST AND THE MIND.--When we ask how the psychologist
conceives of the mind, we must not forget that psychologists are many
and that they differ more or less from each other in their opinions.
When we say "the psychologist" believes this or that, we mean usually
no more than that the opinion referred to is prevalent among men of
that class, or that it is the opinion of those whom we regard as its
more enlightened members.

Taking the words in this somewhat loose sense, I shall ask what the
psychologist's opinion is touching the four points set forth in the
preceding section.  How far does he agree with the plain man?

(1) There can be no doubt that he refers the mind to the body in some
way, although he may shake his head over the use of the word "in."

(2) As to whether the mind acts and reacts with matter, in any sense of
the words analogous to that in which they are commonly used, there is a
division in the camp.  Some affirm such interaction; some deny it.  The
matter will be discussed in the next chapter.

(3) The psychologist--the more modern one--inclines to repudiate any
substance or substratum of the sort accepted in the Middle Ages and
believed in by many men now.  To him the mind is the whole complex of
mental phenomena in their interrelations.  In other words, the mind is
not an unknown and indescribable something that is merely inferred; it
is something revealed in consciousness and open to observation.

(4) The psychologist is certainly not inclined to regard the mind or
any idea belonging to it as material or as extended.  But he does
recognize implicitly, if not explicitly, that ideas are composite.  To
him, as to the plain man, the image held in the memory or imagination
_seems_ to be extended, and he can distinguish its parts.  He does not
do much towards clearing away the difficulty alluded to at the close of
the last section.  It remains for the metaphysician to do what he can
with it, and to him we must turn if we wish light upon this obscure
subject.

34. THE METAPHYSICIAN AND THE MIND.--I have reserved for the next
chapter the first two points mentioned as belonging to the plain man's
doctrine of the mind.  In what sense the mind may be said to be in the
body, and how it may be conceived to be related to the body, are topics
that deserve to be treated by themselves in a chapter on "Mind and
Body."  Here I shall consider what the metaphysician has to say about
the mind as substance, and about the mind as nonextended and immaterial.

It has been said that the Lockian substance is really an "unknowable."
No one pretends to have experience of it; it is revealed to no sense;
it is, indeed, a name for a mere nothing, for when we abstract from a
thing, in thought, every single quality, we find that there is left to
us nothing whatever.

We cannot say that the substance, in this sense of the word, is the
_reality_ of which the qualities are _appearances_.  In Chapter V we
saw just what we may legitimately mean by realities and appearances,
and it was made clear that an unknowable of any sort cannot possibly be
the reality to which this or that appearance is referred.  Appearances
and realities are experiences which are observed to be related in
certain ways.  That which is not open to observation at all, that of
which we have, and can have, no experience, we have no reason to call
the reality of anything.  We have, in truth, no reason to talk about it
at all, for we know nothing whatever about it; and when we do talk
about it, it is because we are laboring under a delusion.

This is equally true whether we are concerned with the substance of
material things or with the substance of minds.  An "unknowable" is an
"unknowable" in any case, and we may simply discard it.  We lose
nothing by so doing, for one cannot lose what one has never had, and
what, by hypothesis, one can never have.  The loss of a mere word
should occasion us no regret.

Now, we have seen that we do not lose the world of real material things
in rejecting the "Unknowable" (Chapter V).  The things are complexes of
qualities, of physical phenomena; and the more we know about these, the
more do we know about real things.

But we have also seen (Chapter IV) that physical phenomena are not the
only phenomena of which we have experience.  We are conscious of mental
phenomena as well, of the phenomena of the subjective order, of
sensations and ideas.  Why not admit that these _constitute_ the mind,
as physical phenomena constitute the things which belong to the
external world?

He who says this says no more than that the mind is known and is
knowable.  It is what it is perceived to be; and the more we know of
mental phenomena, the more do we know of the mind.  Shall we call the
mind as thus known a _substance_?  That depends on the significance
which we give to this word.  It is better, perhaps, to avoid it, for it
is fatally easy to slip into the old use of the word, and then to say,
as men have said, that we do not know the mind as it is, but only as it
appears to us to be--that we do not know the reality, but only its
appearances.

And if we keep clearly before us the view of the mind which I am
advocating, we shall find an easy way out of the difficulties that seem
to confront us when we consider it as nonextended and immaterial.

Certain complexes of mental phenomena--for example, the barber's pole
above alluded to--certainly appear to be extended.  Are they really
extended?  If I imagine a tree a hundred feet high, is it really a
hundred feet high?  Has it any real size at all?

Our problem melts away when we realize what we mean by this "real
size."  In Chapter V, I have distinguished between apparent space and
real space.  Real space is, as was pointed out, the "plan" of the real
physical world.  To occupy any portion of real space, a thing must be a
real external thing; that is, the experiences constituting it must
belong to the objective order, they must not be of the class called
mental.  We all recognize this, in a way.  We know that a real material
foot rule cannot be applied to an imaginary tree.  We say, How big did
the tree seen in a dream _seem_; we do not say, How big was it
_really_?  If we did ask such a question, we should be puzzled to know
where to look for an answer.

And this for a very good reason.  He who asks: How big was that
imaginary tree really? asks, in effect: How much real space did the
unreal tree fill?  The question is a foolish one.  It assumes that
phenomena not in the objective order are in the objective order.  As
well ask how a color smells or how a sound looks.  When we are dealing
with the material we are not dealing with the mental, and we must never
forget this.

The tree imagined or seen in a dream seems extended.  Its extension is
_apparent_ extension, and this apparent extension has no place in the
external world whatever.  But we must not confound this apparent
extension with a real mathematical point, and call the tree nonextended
in this sense.  If we do this we are still in the old error--we have
not gotten away from real space, but have substituted position in that
space for extension in that space.  Nothing mental can have even a
position in real space.  To do that it would have to be a real thing in
the sense indicated.

Let us, then, agree with the plain man in affirming that the mind is
nonextended, but let us avoid misconception.  The mind is constituted
of experiences of the subjective order.  None of these are in
space--real space.  But some of them have apparent extension, and we
must not overlook all that this implies.

Now for the mind as immaterial.  We need not delay long over this
point.  If we mean by the mind the phenomena of the subjective order,
and by what is material the phenomena of the objective order, surely we
may and must say that the mind is immaterial.  The two classes of
phenomena separate themselves out at once.


[1] "The Passions," Articles 34 and 42.




CHAPTER IX

MIND AND BODY

35. IS THE MIND IN THE BODY?--There was a time, as we have seen in the
last chapter (section 30), when it did not seem at all out of the way
to think of the mind as in the body, and very literally in the body.
He who believes the mind to be a breath, or a something composed of
material atoms, can conceive it as being in the body as unequivocally
as chairs can be in a room.  Breath can be inhaled and exhaled; atoms
can be in the head, or in the chest, or the heart, or anywhere else in
the animal economy.  There is nothing dubious about this sense of the
preposition "in."

But we have also seen (section 31) that, as soon as men began to
realize that the mind is not material, the question of its presence in
the body became a serious problem.  If I say that a chair is in a room,
I say what is comprehensible to every one.  It is assumed that it is in
a particular place in the room and is not in some other place.  If,
however, I say that the chair is, as a whole, in every part of the room
at once, I seem to talk nonsense.  This is what Plotinus and those who
came after him said about the mind.  Are their statements any the less
nonsensical because they are talking about minds?  When one speaks
about things mental, one must not take leave of good sense and utter
unmeaning phrases.

If minds are enough like material things to be in anything, they must
be in things in some intelligible sense of the word.  It will not do to
say: I use the word "in," but I do not really mean _in_.  If the
meaning has disappeared, why continue to use the word?  It can only
lead to mystification.

Descartes seemed to come back to something like an intelligible meaning
when he put the mind in the pineal gland in the brain.  Yet, as we have
seen, he clung to the old conception.  He could not go back to the
frank materialization of mind.

And the plain man to-day labors under the same difficulty.  He puts the
mind in the body, in the brain, but he does not put it there frankly
and unequivocally.  It is in the brain and yet not exactly in the
brain.  Let us see if this is not the case.

If we ask him: Does the man who wags his head move his mind about? does
he who mounts a step raise his mind some inches? does he who sits down
on a chair lower his mind?  I think we shall find that he hesitates in
his answers.  And if we go on to say: Could a line be so drawn as to
pass through your image of me and my image of you, and to measure their
distance from one another?  I think he will say, No.  He does not
regard minds and their ideas as existing in space in this fashion.

Furthermore, it would not strike the plain man as absurd if we said to
him: Were our senses far more acute than they are, it is conceivable
that we should be able to perceive every atom in a given human body,
and all its motions.  But would he be willing to admit that an increase
in the sharpness of sense would reveal to us directly the mind
connected with such a body?  It is not, then, in the body as the atoms
are.  It cannot be seen or touched under any conceivable circumstances.
What can it mean, hence, to say that it is _there_?  Evidently, the
word is used in a peculiar sense, and the plain man cannot help us to a
clear understanding of it.

His position becomes intelligible to us when we realize that he has
inherited the doctrine that the mind is immaterial, and that he
struggles, at the same time, with the tendency so natural to man to
conceive it after the analogy of things material.  He thinks of it as
in the body, and, nevertheless, tries to dematerialize this "in."  His
thought is sufficiently vague, and is inconsistent, as might be
expected.

If we will bear in mind what was said in the closing section of the
last chapter, we can help him over his difficulty.  That mind and body
are related there can be no doubt.  But should we use the word "in" to
express this relation?

The body is a certain group of phenomena in the objective order; that
is, it is a part of the external world.  The mind consists of
experiences in the subjective order.  We have seen that no mental
phenomenon can occupy space--real space, the space of the external
world--and that it cannot even have a position in space (section 34).
As mental, it is excluded from the objective order altogether.  The
mind is not, then, strictly speaking, _in_ the body, although it is
related to it.  It remains, of course, to ask ourselves how we ought to
conceive the relation.  This we shall do later in the present chapter.

But, it may be said, it would sound odd to deny that the mind is in the
body.  Does not every one use the expression?  What can we substitute
for it?  I answer: If it is convenient to use the expression let us
continue to do so.  Men must talk so as to be understood.  But let us
not perpetuate error, and, as occasion demands it, let us make clear to
ourselves and to others what we have a right to understand by this _in_
when we use it.

36. THE DOCTRINE OF THE INTERACTIONIST.--There is no man who does not
know that his mind is related to his body as it is not to other
material things.  We open our eyes, and we see things; we stretch out
our hand, and we feel them; our body receives a blow, and we feel pain;
we wish to move, and the muscles are set in motion.

These things are matters of common experience.  We all perceive, in
other words, that there is an interaction, in some sense of the term,
between mind and body.

But it is important to realize that one may be quite well aware of all
such facts, and yet may have very vague notions of what one means by
body and by mind, and may have no definite theory at all of the sort of
relation that obtains between them.  The philosopher tries to attain to
a clearer conception of these things.  His task, be it remembered, is
to analyze and explain, not to deny, the experiences which are the
common property of mankind.

In the present day the two theories of the relation of mind and body
that divide the field between them and stand opposed to each other are
_interactionism_ and _parallelism_.  I have used the word "interaction"
a little above in a loose sense to indicate our common experience of
the fact that we become conscious of certain changes brought about in
our body, and that our purposes realize themselves in action.  But
every one who accepts this fact is not necessarily an interactionist.
The latter is a man who holds a certain more or less definite theory as
to what is implied by the fact.  Let us take a look at his doctrine.

Physical things interact.  A billiard ball in motion strikes one which
has been at rest; the former loses its motion, the latter begins to
roll away.  We explain the occurrence by a reference to the laws of
mechanics; that is to say, we point out that it is merely an instance
of the uniform behavior of matter in motion under such and such
circumstances.  We distinguish between the state of things at one
instant and the state of things at the next, and we call the former
_cause_ and the latter _effect_.

It should be observed that both cause and effect here belong to the one
order, the objective order.  They have their place in the external
world.  Both the balls are material things; their motion, and the space
in which they move, are aspects of the external world.

If the balls did not exist in the same space, if the motion of the one
could not be towards or away from the other, if contact were
impossible, we would manifestly have no interaction _in the sense of
the word employed above_.  As it is, the interaction of physical things
is something that we can describe with a good deal of definiteness.
Things interact in that they stand in certain physical relations, and
undergo changes of relations according to certain laws.

Now, to one who conceives the mind in a grossly material way, the
relation of mind and body can scarcely seem to be a peculiar problem,
different from the problem of the relation of one physical thing to
another.  If my mind consists of atoms disseminated through my body,
its presence in the body appears as unequivocal as the presence of a
dinner in a man who has just risen from the table.  Nor can the
interaction of mind and matter present any unusual difficulties, for
mind is matter.  Atoms may be conceived to approach each other, to
clash, to rearrange themselves.  Interaction of mind and body is
nothing else than an interaction of bodies.  One is not forced to give
a new meaning to the word.

When, however, one begins to think of the mind as immaterial, the case
is very different.  How shall we conceive an immaterial thing to be
related to a material one?

Descartes placed the mind in the pineal gland, and in so far he seemed
to make its relation to the gland similar to that between two material
things.  When he tells us that the soul brings it about that the gland
bends in different directions, we incline to view the occurrence as
very natural--is not the soul in the gland?

But, on the other hand, Descartes also taught that the essence of mind
is _thought_ and the essence of body is _extension_.  He made the two
natures so different from each other that men began to ask themselves
how the two things could interact at all.  The mind wills, said one
philosopher, but that volition does not set matter in motion; when the
mind wills, God brings about the appropriate change in material things.
The mind perceives things, said another, but that is not because they
affect it directly; it sees things in God.  Ideas and things, said a
third, constitute two independent series; no idea can cause a change in
things, and no thing can cause a change in ideas.

The interactionist is a man who refuses to take any such turn as these
philosophers.  His doctrine is much nearer to that of Descartes than it
is to any of theirs.  He uses the one word "interaction" to describe
the relation between material things and also the relation between mind
and body, nor does he dwell upon the difference between the two.  He
insists that mind and matter stand in the one causal nexus; that a
change in the outside world may be the _cause_ of a perception coming
into being in a mind, and that a volition may be the _cause_ of changes
in matter.

What shall we call the plain man?  I think we may call him an
interactionist in embryo.  The stick in his hand knocks an apple off of
the tree; his hand seems to him to be set in motion because he wills
it.  The relation between his volition and the motion of his hand
appears to him to be of much the same sort as that between the motion
of the stick and the fall of the apple.  In each case he thinks he has
to do with the relation of cause and effect.

The opponent of the interactionist insists, however, that the plain man
is satisfied with this view of the matter only because he has not
completely stripped off the tendency to conceive the mind as a material
thing.  And he accuses the interactionist of having fallen a prey to
the same weakness.

Certainly, it is not difficult to show that the interactionists write
as though the mind were material, and could be somewhere in space.  The
late Dr. McCosh fairly represents the thought of many, and he was
capable of expressing himself as follows;[1] "It may be difficult to
ascertain the exact point or surface at which the mind and body come
together and influence each other, in particular, how far into the body
(Descartes without proof thought it to be in the pineal gland), but it
is certain, that when they do meet mind knows body as having its
essential properties of extension and resisting energy."

How can an immaterial thing be located at some point or surface within
the body?  How can a material thing and an immaterial thing "come
together" at a point or surface?  And if they cannot come together,
what have we in mind when we say they interact?

The parallelist, for it is he who opposes interactionism, insists that
we must not forget that mental phenomena do not belong to the same
order as physical phenomena.  He points out that, when we make the word
"interaction" cover the relations of mental phenomena to physical
phenomena as well as the relations of the latter to each other, we are
assimilating heedlessly facts of two different kinds and are
obliterating an important distinction.  He makes the same objection to
calling the relations between mental phenomena and physical phenomena
_causal_.  If the relation of a volition to the movement of the arm is
not the same as that of a physical cause to its physical effect, why,
he argues, do you disguise the difference by calling them by the same
name?

37. THE DOCTRINE OF THE PARALLELIST.--Thus, the parallelist is a man
who is so impressed by the gulf between physical facts and mental facts
that he refuses to regard them as parts of the one order of causes and
effects.  You cannot, he claims, make a single chain out of links so
diverse.

Some part of a human body receives a blow; a message is carried along a
sensory nerve and reaches the brain; from the brain a message is sent
out along a motor nerve to a group of muscles; the muscles contract,
and a limb is set in motion.  The immediate effects of the blow, the
ingoing message, the changes in the brain, the outgoing message, the
contraction of the muscles--all these are physical facts.  One and all
may be described as motions in matter.

But the man who received the blow becomes conscious that he was struck,
and both interactionist and parallelist regard him as becoming
conscious of it when the incoming message reaches some part of the
brain.  What shall be done with this consciousness?  The interactionist
insists that it must be regarded as a link in the physical chain of
causes and effects--he breaks the chain to insert it.  The parallelist
maintains that it is inconceivable that such an insertion should be
made.  He regards the physical series as complete in itself, and he
places the consciousness, as it were, on a _parallel_ line.

It must not be supposed that he takes this figure literally.  It is his
effort to avoid materializing the mind that forces him to hold the
position which he does.  To put the mind in the brain is to make of it
a material thing; to make it parallel to the brain, in the literal
sense of the word, would be just as bad.  All that we may understand
him to mean is that mental phenomena and physical, although they are
related, cannot be built into the one series of causes and effects.  He
is apt to speak of them as _concomitant_.

We must not forget that neither parallelist nor interactionist ever
dreams of repudiating our common experiences of the relations of mental
phenomena and physical.  Neither one will, if he is a man of sense,
abandon the usual ways of describing such experiences.  Whatever his
theory, he will still say: I am suffering because I struck my hand
against that table; I sat down because I chose to do so.  His doctrine
is not supposed to deny the truth contained in such statements; it is
supposed only to give a fuller understanding of it.  Hence, we cannot
condemn either doctrine simply by an uncritical appeal to such
statements and to the experiences they represent.  We must look much
deeper.

Now, what can the parallelist mean by _referring_ sensations and ideas
to the brain and yet denying that they are _in_ the brain?  What is
this reference?

Let us come back to the experiences of the physical and the mental as
they present themselves to the plain man.  They have been discussed at
length in Chapter IV.  It was there pointed out that every one
distinguishes without difficulty between sensations and things, and
that every one recognizes explicitly or implicitly that a sensation is
an experience referred in a certain way to the body.

When the eyes are open, we _see_; when the ears are open, we _hear_;
when the hand is laid on things, we _feel_.  How do we know that we are
experiencing sensations?  The setting tells us that.  The experience in
question is given together with an experience of the body.  This is
_concomitance of the mental and the physical_ as it appears in the
experience of us all; and from such experiences as these the
philosopher who speaks of the concomitance of physical and mental
phenomena must draw the whole meaning of the word.

Let us here sharpen a little the distinction between sensations and
things.  Standing at some distance from the tree, I see an apple fall
to the ground.  Were I only half as far away, my experience would not
be exactly the same--I should have somewhat different sensations.  As
we have seen (section 17), the apparent sizes of things vary as we
move, and this means that the quantity of sensation, when I observe the
apple from a nearer point, is greater.  The man of science tells me
that the image which the object looked at projects upon the retina of
the eye grows larger as we approach objects.  The thing, then, may
remain unchanged; our sensations will vary according to the impression
which is made upon our body.

Again.  When I have learned something of physics, I am ready to admit
that, although light travels with almost inconceivable rapidity, still,
its journey through space does take time.  Hence the impression made
upon my eye by the falling apple is not simultaneous with the fall
itself; and if I stand far away it is made a little later than when I
am near.  In the case in point the difference is so slight as to pass
unnoticed, but there are cases in which it seems apparent even to the
unlearned that sensations arise later than the occurrences of which we
take them to be the report.

Thus, I stand on a hill and watch a laborer striking with his sledge
upon the distant railway.  I hear the sound of the blow while I see his
tool raised above his head.  I account for this by saying that it has
taken some time for the sound-waves to reach my ear, and I regard my
sensation as arising only when this has been accomplished.

But this conclusion is not judged sufficiently accurate by the man of
science.  The investigations of the physiologist and the psychologist
have revealed that the brain holds a peculiar place in the economy of
the body.  If the nerve which connects the sense organ with the brain
be severed, the sensation does not arise.  Injuries to the brain affect
the mental life as injuries to other parts of the body do not.  Hence,
it is concluded that, to get the real time of the emergence of a
sensation, we must not inquire merely when an impression was made upon
the organ of sense, but must determine when the message sent along the
nerve has reached some part of the brain.  The resulting brain change
is regarded as the true concomitant of the sensation.  If there is a
brain change of a certain kind, there is the corresponding sensation.
It need hardly be said that no one knows as yet much about the brain
motions which are supposed to be concomitants of sensations, although a
good deal is said about them.

It is very important to remark that in all this no new meaning has been
given to the word "concomitance."  The plain man remarks that
sensations and their changes must be referred to the body.  With the
body disposed in a certain way, he has sensations of a certain kind;
with changes in the body, the sensations change.  He does not perceive
the sensations to be in the body.  As I recede from a house I have a
whole series of visual experiences differing from each other and ending
in a faint speck which bears little resemblance to the experience with
which I started.  I have had, as we say, a series of sensations, or
groups of such.  Did any single group, did the experience which I had
at any single moment, seem to me to be _in my body_?  Surely not.  Its
relation to my body is other than that.

And when the man of science, instead of referring sensations vaguely to
the body, refers them to the brain, the reference is of precisely the
same nature.  From our common experience of the relation of the
physical and the mental he starts out.  He has no other ground on which
to stand.  He can only mark the reference with greater exactitude.

I have been speaking of the relation of sensations to the brain.  It is
scarcely necessary for me to show that all other mental phenomena must
be referred to the brain as well, and that the reference must be of the
same nature.  The considerations which lead us to refer ideas to the
brain are set forth in our physiologies and psychologies.  The effects
of cerebral disease, injuries to the brain, etc., are too well known to
need mention; and it is palpably as absurd to put ideas in the brain as
it is to put sensations there.

Now, the parallelist, if he be a wise man, will not attempt to
_explain_ the reference of mental phenomena to the brain--to _explain_
the relation between mind and matter.  The relation appears to be
unique.  Certainly it is not identical with the relation between two
material things.  We explain things, in the common acceptation of the
word, when we show that a case under consideration is an
exemplification of some general law--when we show, in other words, that
it does not stand alone.  But this does stand alone, and is admitted to
stand alone.  We admit as much when we say that the mind is immaterial,
and yet hold that it is related to the body.  We cannot, then, ask for
an _explanation_ of the relation.

But this does not mean that the reference of mental phenomena to the
body is a meaningless expression.  We can point to those experiences of
concomitance that we all have, distinguish them carefully from
relations of another kind, and say: This is what the word means,
whether it be used by the plain man or by the man of science.

I have said above: "If there is a brain change of a certain kind, there
is the corresponding sensation."  Perhaps the reader will feel inclined
to say here: If you can say as much as this, why can you not go a
little farther and call the brain change the _cause_ of the sensation?

But he who speaks thus, forgets what has been said above about the
uniqueness of the relation.  In the objective order of our experiences,
in the external world, we can distinguish between antecedents and
consequents, between causes and their effects.  The causes and their
effects belong to the one order, they stand in the same series.  The
relation of the physical to the mental is, as we have seen, a different
relation.  Hence, the parallelist seems justified in objecting to the
assimilation of the two.  He prefers the word "concomitance," just
because it marks the difference.  He does not mean to indicate that the
relation is any the less uniform or dependable when he denies that it
is causal.

38. IN WHAT SENSE MENTAL PHENOMENA HAVE A TIME AND PLACE.--We have seen
in Chapters VI and VII what space and time--real space and time--are.
They are the plan of the real external world and its changes; they are
aspects of the objective order of experience.

To this order no mental phenomenon can belong.  It cannot, as we have
seen (section 35), occupy any portion of space or even have a location
in space.  It is equally true that no series of mental changes can
occupy any portion of time, real time, or even fill a single moment in
the stream of time.  There are many persons to whom this latter
statement will seem difficult of acceptance; but the relation of mental
phenomena to space and to time is of the same sort, and we can consider
the two together.

Psychologists speak unhesitatingly of the localization of sensations in
the brain, and they talk as readily of the moment at which a sensation
arises and of the duration of the sensation.  What can they mean by
such expressions?

We have seen that sensations are not in the brain, and their
localization means only the determination of their concomitant physical
phenomena, of the corresponding brain-change.  And it ought to be clear
even from what has been said above that, in determining the moment at
which a sensation arises, we are determining only the time of the
concomitant brain process.  Why do we say that a sensation arises later
than the moment at which an impression is made upon the organ of sense
and earlier than the resulting movement of some group of muscles?
Because the change in the brain, to which we refer the sensation,
occurs later than the one and earlier than the other.  This has a place
in real time, it belongs to that series of world changes whose
succession constitutes real time.  If we ask _when_ anything happened,
we always refer to this series of changes.  We try to determine its
place in the world order.

Thus, we ask: When was Julius Caesar born?  We are given a year and a
day.  How is the time which has elapsed since measured?  By changes in
the physical world, by revolutions of the earth about the sun.  We ask:
When did he conceive the plan of writing his Commentaries?  If we get
an answer at all, it must be an answer of the same kind--some point in
the series of physical changes which occur in real time must be
indicated.  Where else should we look for an answer?  In point of fact,
we never do look elsewhere.

Again.  We have distinguished between apparent space and real space
(section 34).  We have seen that, when we deny that a mental image can
occupy any portion of space, we need not think of it as losing its
parts and shrivelling to a point.  We may still attribute to it
apparent space; may affirm that it seems extended.  Let us mark the
same distinction when we consider time.  The psychologist speaks of the
duration of a sensation.  Has it real duration?  It is not in time at
all, and, of course, it cannot, strictly speaking, occupy a portion of
time.  But we can try to measure the duration of the physical
concomitant, and call this the real duration of the sensation.

We all distinguish between the real time of mental phenomena, in the
sense indicated just above, and the apparent time.  We know very well
that the one may give us no true measure of the other.  A sermon
_seems_ long; was it _really_ long?  There is only one way of measuring
its real length.  We must refer to the clock, to the sun, to some
change in the physical world.  We _seem_ to live years in a dream; was
the dream _really_ a long one?  The real length can only be determined,
if at all, by a physical reference.  Those apparent years of the dream
have no place in the real time which is measured by the clock.  We do
not have to cut it and insert them somewhere.  They belong to a
different order, and cannot be inserted any more than the thought of a
patch can be inserted in a rent in a real coat.

We see, thus, when we reflect upon the matter, that mental phenomena
cannot, strictly speaking, be said to have a time and place.  He who
attributes these to them materializes them.  But their physical
concomitants have a time and place, and mental phenomena can be
ordered by a reference to these.  They can be assigned a time and
place of existing in a special sense of the words not to be confounded
with the sense in which we use them when we speak of the time and place
of material things.  This makes it possible to relate every mental
phenomenon to the world system in a definite way, and to distinguish it
clearly from every other, however similar.

We need not, when we come to understand this, change our usual modes of
speech.  We may still say: The pain I had two years ago is like the
pain I have to-day; my sensation came into being at such a moment; my
regret lasted two days.  We speak that we may be understood; and such
phrases express a truth, even if they are rather loose and inaccurate.
But we must not be deceived by such phrases, and assume that they mean
what they have no right to mean.

39. OBJECTIONS TO PARALLELISM.--What objections can be brought against
parallelism?  It is sometimes objected by the interactionist that it
abandons the plain man's notion of the mind as a substance with its
attributes, and makes of it a mere collection of mental phenomena.  It
must be admitted that the parallelist usually holds a view which
differs rather widely from that of the unlearned.

But even supposing this objection well taken, it can no longer be
regarded as an objection specifically to the doctrine of parallelism,
for the view of the mind in question is becoming increasingly popular,
and it is now held by influential interactionists as well as by
parallelists.  One may believe that the mind consists of ideas, and may
still hold that ideas can cause motions in matter.

There is, however, another objection that predisposes many thoughtful
persons to reject parallelism uncompromisingly.  It is this.  If we
admit that the chain of physical causes and effects, from a blow given
to the body to the resulting muscular movements made in self-defense,
is an unbroken one, what part can we assign to the mind in the whole
transaction?  Has it _done_ anything?  Is it not reduced to the
position of a passive spectator?  Must we not regard man as "a physical
automaton with parallel psychical states"?

Such an account of man cannot fail to strike one as repugnant; and yet
it is the parallelist himself whom we must thank for introducing us to
it.  The account is not a caricature from the pen of an opponent.  "An
automaton," writes Professor Clifford,[2] "is a thing that goes by
itself when it is wound up, and we go by ourselves when we have had
food.  Excepting the fact that other men are conscious, there is no
reason why we should not regard the human body as merely an exceedingly
complicated machine which is wound up by putting food into the mouth.
But it is not _merely_ a machine, because consciousness goes with it.
The mind, then, is to be regarded as a stream of feelings which runs
parallel to, and simultaneous with, a certain part of the action of the
body, that is to say, that particular part of the action of the brain
in which the cerebrum and the sensory tracts are excited."

The saving statement that the body is not _merely_ a machine, because
consciousness goes with it, does not impress one as being sufficient to
redeem the illustration.  Who wants to be an automaton with an
accompanying consciousness?  Who cares to regard his mind as an
"epiphenomenon"--a thing that exists, but whose existence or
nonexistence makes no difference to the course of affairs?

The plain man's objection to such an account of himself seems to be
abundantly justified.  As I have said earlier in this chapter, neither
interactionist nor parallelist has the intention of repudiating the
experience of world and mind common to us all.  We surely have evidence
enough to prove that minds count for something.  No house was ever
built, no book was ever written, by a creature without a mind; and the
better the house or book, the better the mind.  _That_ there is a fixed
and absolutely dependable relation between the planning mind and the
thing accomplished, no man of any school has the right to deny.  The
only legitimate question is: _What is the nature_ of the relation?  Is
it _causal_, or should it be conceived to be _something else_?

The whole matter will be more fully discussed in Chapter XI.  This
chapter I shall close with a brief summary of the points which the
reader will do well to bear in mind when he occupies himself with
parallelism.

(1) Parallelism is a protest against the interactionist's tendency to
materialize the mind.

(2) The name is a figurative expression, and must not be taken
literally.  The true relation between mental phenomena and physical is
given in certain common experiences that have been indicated, and it is
a unique relation.

(3) It is a fixed and absolutely dependable relation.  It is impossible
that there should be a particular mental fact without its corresponding
physical fact; and it is impossible that this physical fact should
occur without its corresponding mental fact.

(4) The parallelist objects to calling this relation _causal_, because
this obscures the distinction between it and the relation between facts
both of which are physical.  He prefers the word "concomitance."

(5) Such objections to parallelism as that cited above assume that the
concomitance of which the parallelist speaks is analogous to physical
concomitance.  The chemist puts together a volume of hydrogen gas and a
volume of chlorine gas, and the result is two volumes of hydrochloric
acid gas.  We regard it as essential to the result that there should be
the two gases and that they should be brought together.  But the fact
that the chemist has red hair we rightly look upon as a concomitant
phenomenon of no importance.  The result would be the same if he had
black hair or were bald.  But this is not the concomitance that
interests the parallelist.  The two sorts of concomitance are alike
only in the one point.  Some phenomenon is regarded as excluded from
the series of causes and effects under discussion.  On the other hand,
the difference between the two is all-important; in the one case, the
concomitant phenomenon is an accidental circumstance that might just as
well be absent; in the other, it is nothing of the sort; it _cannot_ be
absent--the mental fact _must_ exist if the brain-change in question
exists.

It is quite possible that, on reading this list of points, one may be
inclined to make two protests.

First: Is a parallelism so carefully guarded as this properly called
_parallelism_ at all?  To this I answer: The name matters little.  I
have used it because I have no better term.  Certainly, it is not the
parallelism which is sometimes brought forward, and which peeps out
from the citation from Clifford.  It is nothing more than an insistence
upon the truth that we should not treat the mind as though it were a
material thing.  If any one wishes to take the doctrine and discard the
name, I have no objection.  As so guarded, the doctrine is, I think,
true.

Second: If it is desirable to avoid the word "cause," in speaking of
the relation of the mental and the physical, on the ground that
otherwise we give the word a double sense, why is it not desirable to
avoid the word "concomitance"?  Have we not seen that the word is
ambiguous?  I admit the inconsistency and plead in excuse only that I
have chosen the lesser of two evils.  It is fatally easy to slip into
the error of thinking of the mind as though it were material and had a
place in the physical world.  In using the word "concomitance" I enter
a protest against this.  But I have, of course, no right to use it
without showing just what kind of concomitance I mean.


[1] "First and Fundamental Truths," Book I, Part II, Chapter II.  New
York, 1889.

[2] "Lectures and Essays," Vol. II, p. 57.  London, 1879.




CHAPTER X

HOW WE KNOW THERE ARE OTHER MINDS

40. IS IT CERTAIN THAT WE KNOW IT?--I suppose there is no man in his
sober senses who seriously believes that no other mind than his own
exists.  There is, to be sure, an imaginary being more or less
discussed by those interested in philosophy, a creature called the
Solipsist, who is credited with this doctrine.  But men do not become
solipsists, though they certainly say things now and then that other
men think logically lead to some such unnatural view of things; and
more rarely they say things that sound as if the speaker, in some
moods, at least, might actually harbor such a view.

Thus the philosopher Fichte (1762-1814) talks in certain of his
writings as though he believed himself to be the universe, and his
words cause Jean Paul Richter, the inimitable, to break out in his
characteristic way: "The very worst of it all is the lazy, aimless,
aristocratic, insular life that a god must lead; he has no one to go
with.  If I am not to sit still for all time and eternity, if I let
myself down as well as I can and make myself finite, that I may have
something in the way of society, still I have, like petty princes, only
my own creatures to echo my words. . . .  Every being, even the highest
Being, wishes something to love and to honor.  But the Fichtean
doctrine that I am my own body-maker leaves me with nothing
whatever--with not so much as the beggar's dog or the prisoner's
spider. . . .  Truly I wish that there were men, and that I were one of
them. . . .  If there exists, as I very much fear, no one but myself,
unlucky dog that I am, then there is no one at such a pass as I."

Just how much Fichte's words meant to the man who wrote them may be a
matter for dispute.  Certainly no one has shown a greater moral
earnestness or a greater regard for his fellowmen than this
philosopher, and we must not hastily accuse any one of being a
solipsist.  But that to certain men, and, indeed, to many men, there
have come thoughts that have seemed to point in this direction--that
not a few have had doubts as to their ability to _prove_ the existence
of other minds--this we must admit.

It appears somewhat easier for a man to have doubts upon this subject
when he has fallen into the idealistic error of regarding the material
world, which seems to be revealed to him, as nothing else than his
"ideas" or "sensations" or "impressions."  If we will draw the whole
"telephone exchange" into the clerk, there seems little reason for not
including all the subscribers as well.  If other men's bodies are my
sensations, may not other men's minds be my imaginings?  But doubts may
be felt also by those who are willing to admit a real external world.
How do we know that our inference to the existence of other minds is a
justifiable inference?  Can there be such a thing as _verification_ in
this field?

For we must remember that no man is directly conscious of any mind
except his own.  Men cannot exhibit their minds to their neighbors as
they exhibit their wigs.  However close may seem to us to be our
intercourse with those about us, do we ever attain to anything more
than our ideas of the contents of their minds?  We do not experience
these contents; we picture them, we represent them by certain proxies.
To be sure, we believe that the originals exist, but can we be quite
sure of it?  Can there be a _proof_ of this right to make the leap from
one consciousness to another?  We seem to assume that we can make it,
and then we make it again and again; but suppose, after all, that there
were nothing there.  Could we ever find out our error?  And in a field
where it is impossible to prove error, must it not be equally
impossible to prove truth?

The doubt has seemed by no means a gratuitous one to certain very
sensible practical men.  "It is wholly impossible," writes Professor
Huxley,[1] "absolutely to prove the presence or absence of
consciousness in anything but one's own brain, though by analogy, we
are justified in assuming its existence in other men."  "The existence
of my conception of you in my consciousness," says Clifford,[2]
"carries with it a belief in the existence of you outside of my
consciousness. . . .  How this inference is justified, how
consciousness can testify to the existence of anything outside of
itself, I do not pretend to say: I need not untie a knot which the
world has cut for me long ago.  It may very well be that I myself am
the only existence, but it is simply ridiculous to suppose that anybody
else is.  The position of absolute idealism may, therefore, be left out
of count, although each individual may be unable to justify his dissent
from it."

These are writers belonging to our own modern age, and they are men of
science.  Both of them deny that the existence of other minds is a
thing that can be _proved_; but the one tells us that we are "justified
in assuming" their existence, and the other informs us that, although
"it may very well be" that no other mind exists, we may leave that
possibility out of count.

Neither position seems a sensible one.  Are we justified in assuming
what cannot be proved? or is the argument "from analogy" really a proof
of some sort?  Is it right to close our eyes to what "may very well
be," just because we choose to do so?  The fact is that both of these
writers had the conviction, shared by us all, that there are other
minds, and that we know something about them; and yet neither of them
could see that the conviction rested upon an unshakable foundation.

Now, I have no desire to awake in the mind of any one a doubt of the
existence of other minds.  But I think we must all admit that the man
who recognizes that such minds are not directly perceived, and who
harbors doubts as to the nature of the inference which leads to their
assumption, may, perhaps, be able to say that _he feels certain_ that
there are other minds; but must we not at the same time admit that he
is scarcely in a position to say: _it is certain_ that there are other
minds?  The question will keep coming back again: May there not, after
all, be a legitimate doubt on the subject?

To set this question at rest there seems to be only one way, and that
is this: to ascertain the nature of the inference which is made, and to
see clearly what can be meant by _proof_ when one is concerned with
such matters as these.  If it turns out that we have proof, in the only
sense of the word in which it is reasonable to ask for proof, our doubt
falls away of itself.

41. THE ARGUMENT FOR OTHER MINDS.--I have said early in this volume
(section 7) that the plain man perceives that other men act very much
as he does, and that he attributes to them minds more or less like his
own.  He reasons from like to like--other bodies present phenomena
which, in the case of his own body, he perceives to be indicative of
mind, and he accepts them as indicative of mind there also.  The
psychologist makes constant use of this inference; indeed, he could not
develop his science without it.

John Stuart Mill (1806-1873), whom it is always a pleasure to read
because he is so clear and straightforward, presents this argument in
the following form:[3]--

"By what evidence do I know, or by what considerations am I led to
believe, that there exist other sentient creatures; that the walking
and speaking figures which I see and hear, have sensations and
thoughts, or, in other words, possess Minds?  The most strenuous
Intuitionist does not include this among the things that I know by
direct intuition.  I conclude it from certain things, which my
experience of my own states of feeling proves to me to be marks of it.
These marks are of two kinds, antecedent and subsequent; the previous
conditions requisite for feeling, and the effects or consequences of
it.  I conclude that other human beings have feelings like me, because,
first, they have bodies like me, which I know, in my own case, to be
the antecedent condition of feelings; and because, secondly, they
exhibit the acts, and other outward signs, which in my own case I know
by experience to be caused by feelings.  I am conscious in myself of a
series of facts connected by a uniform sequence, of which the beginning
is modifications of my body, the middle is feelings, the end is outward
demeanor.  In the case of other human beings I have the evidence of my
senses for the first and last links of the series, but not for the
intermediate link.  I find, however, that the sequence between the
first and last is as regular and constant in those other cases as it is
in mine.  In my own case I know that the first link produces the last
through the intermediate link, and could not produce it without.
Experience, therefore, obliges me to conclude that there must be an
intermediate link; which must either be the same in others as in
myself, or a different one.  I must either believe them to be alive, or
to be automatons; and by believing them to be alive, that is, by
supposing the link to be of the same nature as in the case of which I
have experience, and which is in all respects similar, I bring other
human beings, as phenomena, under the same generalizations which I know
by experience to be the true theory of my own existence.  And in doing
so I conform to the legitimate rules of experimental inquiry.  The
process is exactly parallel to that by which Newton proved that the
force which keeps the planets in their orbits is identical with that by
which an apple falls to the ground.  It was not incumbent on Newton to
prove the impossibility of its being any other force; he was thought to
have made out his point when he had simply shown that no other force
need be supposed.  We know the existence of other beings by
generalization from the knowledge of our own; the generalization merely
postulates that what experience shows to be a mark of the existence of
something within the sphere of our consciousness, may be concluded to
be a mark of the same thing beyond that sphere."

Now, the plain man accepts the argument from analogy, here insisted
upon, every day of his life.  He is continually forming an opinion as
to the contents of other minds on a basis of the bodily manifestations
presented to his view.  The process of inference is so natural and
instinctive that we are tempted to say that it hardly deserves to be
called an inference.  Certainly the man is not conscious of distinct
steps in the process; he perceives certain phenomena, and they are at
once illuminated by their interpretation.  He reads other men as we
read a book--the signs on the paper are scarcely attended to, our whole
thought is absorbed in that for which they stand.  As I have said
above, the psychologist accepts the argument, and founds his
conclusions upon it.

Upon what ground can one urge that this inference to other minds is a
doubtful one?  It is made universally.  We have seen that even those
who have theoretic objections against it, do not hesitate to draw it,
as a matter of fact.  It appears unnatural in the extreme to reject it.
What can induce men to regard it with suspicion?

I think the answer to this question is rather clearly suggested in the
sentence already quoted from Professor Huxley:  "It is wholly
impossible absolutely to prove the presence or absence of consciousness
in anything but one's own brain, though, by analogy, we are justified
in assuming its existence in other men."

Here Professor Huxley admits that we have something like a proof, for
he regards the inference as _justified_.  But he does not think that we
have _absolute proof_--the best that we can attain to appears to be a
degree of probability falling short of the certainty which we should
like to have.

Now, it should be remarked that the discredit cast upon the argument
for other minds has its source in the fact that it does not satisfy a
certain assumed standard.  What is that standard?  It is the standard
of proof which we may look for and do look for where we are concerned
to establish the existence of material things with the highest degree
of certainty.

There are all sorts of indirect ways of proving the existence of
material things.  We may read about them in a newspaper, and regard
them as highly doubtful; we may have the word of a man whom, on the
whole, we regard as veracious; we may infer their existence, because we
perceive that certain other things exist, and are to be accounted for.
Under certain circumstances, however, we may have proof of a different
kind: we may see and touch the things themselves.  Material things are
open to direct inspection.  Such a direct inspection constitutes
_absolute proof_, so far as material things are concerned.

But we have no right to set this up as our standard of absolute proof,
when we are talking about other minds.  In this field it is not proof
at all.  Anything that can be directly inspected is not another mind.
We cannot cast a doubt upon the existence of colors by pointing to the
fact that we cannot smell them.  If they could be smelt, they would not
be colors.  We must in each case seek a proof of the appropriate kind.

What have we a right to regard as absolute proof of the existence of
another mind?  Only this: the analogy upon which we depend in making
our inference must be a very close one.  As we shall see in the next
section, the analogy is sometimes very remote, and we draw the
inference with much hesitation, or, perhaps, refuse to draw it at all.
It is not, however, the _kind of inference_ that makes the trouble; it
is the lack of detailed information that may serve as a basis for
inference.  Our inference to other minds is unsatisfactory only in so
far as we are ignorant of our own minds and bodies and of other bodies.
Were our knowledge in these fields complete, we should know without
fail the signs of mind, and should know whether an inference were or
were not justified.

And _justified_ here means proved--proved in the only sense in which we
have a right to ask for proof.  No single fact is known that can
discredit such a proof.  Our doubt is, then, gratuitous and can be
dismissed.  We may claim that we have _verification_ of the existence
of other minds.  Such verification, however, must consist in showing
that, in any given instance, the signs of mind really are present.  It
cannot consist in presenting minds for inspection as though they were
material things.

One more matter remains to be touched upon in this section.  It has
doubtless been observed that Mill, in the extract given above, seems to
place "feelings," in other words, mental phenomena, between one set of
bodily motions and another.  He makes them the middle link in a chain
whose first and third links are material.  The parallelist cannot treat
mind in this way.  He claims that to make mental phenomena effects or
causes of bodily motions is to make them material.

Must, then, the parallelist abandon the argument for other minds?  Not
at all.  The force of the argument lies in interpreting the phenomena
presented by other bodies as one knows by experience the phenomena of
one's own body must be interpreted.  He who concludes that the relation
between his own mind and his own body can best be described as a
"parallelism," must judge that other men's minds are related to their
bodies in the same way.  He must treat his neighbor as he treats
himself.  The argument from analogy remains the same.

42. WHAT OTHER MINDS ARE THERE?--That other men have minds nobody
really doubts, as we have seen above.  They resemble us so closely,
their actions are so analogous to our own, that, although we sometimes
give ourselves a good deal of trouble to ascertain what sort of minds
they have, we never think of asking ourselves whether they have minds.

Nor does it ever occur to the man who owns a dog, or who drives a
horse, to ask himself whether the creature has a mind.  He may complain
that it has not much of a mind, or he may marvel at its
intelligence--his attitude will depend upon the expectations which he
has been led to form.  But regard the animal as he would regard a
bicycle or an automobile, he will not.  The brute is not precisely like
us, but its actions bear an unmistakable analogy to our own; pleasure
and pain, hope and fear, desire and aversion, are so plainly to be read
into them that we feel that a man must be "high gravel blind" not to
see their significance.

Nevertheless, it has been possible for man, under the prepossession of
a mistaken philosophical theory, to assume the whole brute creation to
be without consciousness.  When Descartes had learned something of the
mechanism of the human body, and had placed the human soul--_hospes
comesque corporis_--in the little pineal gland in the midst of the
brain, the conception in his mind was not unlike that which we have
when we picture to ourselves a locomotive engine with an engineer in
its cab.  The man gives intelligent direction; but, under some
circumstances, the machine can do a good deal in the absence of the
man; if it is started, it can run of itself, and to do this, it must go
through a series of complicated motions.

Descartes knew that many of the actions performed by the human body are
not the result of conscious choice, and that some of them are in direct
contravention of the will's commands.  The eye protects itself by
dropping its lid, when the hand is brought suddenly before it; the foot
jerks away from the heated object which it has accidentally touched.
The body was seen to be a mechanism relatively independent of the mind,
and one rather complete in itself.  Joined with a soul, the circle of
its functions was conceived to be widened; but even without the
assistance of the soul, it was thought that it could keep itself busy,
and could do many things that the unreflective might be inclined to
attribute to the efficiency of the mind.

The bodies of the brutes Descartes regarded as mechanisms of the same
general nature as the human body.  He was unwilling to allow a soul to
any creature below man, so nothing seemed left to him save to maintain
that the brutes are machines without consciousness, and that their
apparently purposive actions are to be classed with such human
movements as the sudden closing of the eye when it is threatened with
the hand.  The melancholy results of this doctrine made themselves
evident among his followers.  Even the mild and pious Malebranche could
be brutal to a dog which fawned upon him, under the mistaken notion
that it did not really hurt a dog to kick it.

All this reasoning men have long ago set aside.  For one thing, it has
come to be recognized that there may be consciousness, perhaps rather
dim, blind, and fugitive, but still consciousness, which does not get
itself recognized as do our clearly conscious purposes and volitions.
Many of the actions of man which Descartes was inclined to regard as
unaccompanied by consciousness may not, in fact, be really unconscious.
And, in the second place, it has come to be realized that we have no
right to class all the actions of the brutes with those reflex actions
in man which we are accustomed to regard as automatic.

The belief in animal automatism has passed away, it is to be hoped,
never to return.  That lower animals have minds we must believe.  But
what sort of minds have they?

It is hard enough to gain an accurate notion of what is going on in a
human mind.  Men resemble each other more or less closely, but no two
are precisely alike, and no two have had exactly the same training.  I
may misunderstand even the man who lives in the same house with me and
is nearly related to me.  Does he really suffer and enjoy as acutely as
he seems to? or must his words and actions be accepted with a discount?
The greater the difference between us, the more danger that I shall
misjudge him.  It is to be expected that men should misunderstand
women; that men and women should misunderstand children; that those who
differ in social station, in education, in traditions and habits of
life, should be in danger of reading each other as one reads a book in
a tongue imperfectly mastered.  When these differences are very great,
the task is an extremely difficult one.  What are the emotions, if he
has any, of the Chinaman in the laundry near by?  His face seems as
difficult of interpretation as are the hieroglyphics that he has pasted
up on his window.

When we come to the brutes, the case is distinctly worse.  We think
that we can attain to some notion of the minds to be attributed to such
animals as the ape, the dog, the cat, the horse, and it is not nonsense
to speak of an animal psychology.  But who will undertake to tell us
anything definite of the mind of a fly, a grasshopper, a snail, or a
cuttlefish?  That they have minds, or something like minds, we must
believe; what their minds are like, a prudent man scarcely even
attempts to say.  In our distribution of minds may we stop short of
even the very lowest animal organisms?  It seems arbitrary to do so.

More than that; some thoughtful men have been led by the analogy
between plant life and animal life to believe that something more or
less remotely like the consciousness which we attribute to animals must
be attributed also to plants.  Upon this belief I shall not dwell, for
here we are evidently at the limit of our knowledge, and are making the
vaguest of guesses.  No one pretends that we have even the beginnings
of a plant psychology.  At the same time, we must admit that organisms
of all sorts do bear some analogy to each other, even if it be a remote
one; and we must admit also that we cannot _prove_ plants to be wholly
devoid of a rudimentary consciousness of some sort.

As we begin with man and descend the scale of beings, we seem, in the
upper part of the series, to be in no doubt that minds exist.  Our only
question is as to the precise contents of those minds.  Further down we
begin to ask ourselves whether anything like mind is revealed at all.
That this should be so is to be expected.  Our argument for other minds
is the argument from analogy, and as we move down the scale our analogy
grows more and more remote until it seems to fade out altogether.  He
who harbors doubts as to whether the plants enjoy some sort of psychic
life, may well find those doubts intensified when he turns to study the
crystal; and when he contemplates inorganic matter he should admit that
the thread of his argument has become so attenuated that he cannot find
it at all.

43. THE DOCTRINE OF MIND-STUFF.--Nevertheless, there have been those
who have attributed something like consciousness even to inorganic
matter.  If the doctrine of evolution be true, argues Professor
Clifford,[4] "we shall have along the line of the human pedigree a
series of imperceptible steps connecting inorganic matter with
ourselves.  To the later members of that series we must undoubtedly
ascribe consciousness, although it must, of course, have been simpler
than our own.  But where are we to stop?  In the case of organisms of a
certain complexity, consciousness is inferred.  As we go back along the
line, the complexity of the organism and of its nerve-action insensibly
diminishes; and for the first part of our course we see reason to think
that the complexity of consciousness insensibly diminishes also.  But
if we make a jump, say to the tunicate mollusks, we see no reason there
to infer the existence of consciousness at all.  Yet not only is it
impossible to point out a place where any sudden break takes place, but
it is contrary to all the natural training of our minds to suppose a
breach of continuity so great."

We must not, says Clifford, admit any breach of continuity.  We must
assume that consciousness is a complex of elementary feelings, "or
rather of those remoter elements which cannot even be felt, but of
which the simplest feeling is built up."  We must assume that such
elementary facts go along with the action of every organism, however
simple; but we must assume also that it is only when the organism has
reached a certain complexity of nervous structure that the complex of
psychic facts reaches the degree of complication that we call
Consciousness.

So much for the assumption of something like mind in the mollusk, where
Clifford cannot find direct evidence of mind.  But the argument does
not stop here: "As the line of ascent is unbroken, and must end at last
in inorganic matter, we have no choice but to admit that every motion
of matter is simultaneous with some . . . fact or event which might be
part of a consciousness."

Of the universal distribution of the elementary constituents of mind
Clifford writes as follows: "That element of which, as we have seen,
even the simplest feeling is a complex, I shall call _Mind-stuff_.  A
moving molecule of inorganic matter does not possess mind or
consciousness; but it possesses a small piece of mind-stuff.  When
molecules are so combined together as to form the film on the under
side of a jellyfish, the elements of mind-stuff which go along with
them are so combined as to form the faint beginnings of Sentience.
When the molecules are so combined as to form the brain and nervous
system of a vertebrate, the corresponding elements of mind-stuff are so
combined as to form some kind of consciousness; that is to say, changes
in the complex which take place at the same time get so linked together
that the repetition of one implies the repetition of the other.  When
matter takes the complex form of a living human brain, the
corresponding mind-stuff takes the form of a human consciousness,
having intelligence and volition."

This is the famous mind-stuff doctrine.  It is not a scientific
doctrine, for it rests on wholly unproved assumptions.  It is a play of
the speculative fancy, and has its source in the author's strong desire
to fit mental phenomena into some general evolutionary scheme.  As he
is a parallelist, and cannot make of physical phenomena and of mental
one single series of causes and effects, he must attain his end by
making the mental series complete and independent in itself.  To do
this, he is forced to make several very startling assumptions:--

(1) We have seen that there is evidence that there is consciousness
somewhere--it is revealed by certain bodies.  Clifford assumes
consciousness, or rather its raw material, _mind-stuff_, to be
everywhere.  For this assumption we have not a whit of evidence.

(2) To make of the stuff thus attained a satisfactory evolutionary
series, he is compelled to assume that mental phenomena are related to
each other much as physical phenomena are related to each other.  This
notion he had from Spinoza, who held that, just as all that takes place
in the physical world must be accounted for by a reference to physical
causes, so all happenings in the world of ideas must be accounted for
by a reference to mental causes, _i.e._ to ideas.  For this assumption
there is no more evidence than for the former.

(3) Finally, to bring the mental phenomena we are familiar with,
sensations of color, sound, touch, taste, etc., into this evolutionary
scheme, he is forced to assume that all such mental phenomena are made
up of elements which do not belong to these classes at all, of
something that "cannot even be felt."  For this assumption there is as
little evidence as there is for the other two.

The fact is that the _mind-stuff_ doctrine is a castle in the air.  It
is too fanciful and arbitrary to take seriously.  It is much better to
come back to a more sober view of things, and to hold that there is
evidence that other minds exist, but no evidence that every material
thing is animated.  If we cannot fit this into our evolutionary scheme,
perhaps it is well to reexamine our evolutionary scheme, and to see
whether some misconception may not attach to that.


[1] "Collected Essays," Vol. I, p. 219, New York, 1902.

[2] "On the Nature of Things-in-Themselves," in "Lectures and Essays,"
Vol. II.

[3] "Examination of Sir William Hamilton's Philosophy," Chapter XII.

[4] "On the Nature of Things-in-Themselves."




CHAPTER XI

OTHER PROBLEMS OF WORLD AND MIND

44. IS THE MATERIAL WORLD A MECHANISM?--So far we have concerned
ourselves with certain leading problems touching the external world and
the mind,--problems which seem to present themselves unavoidably to those
who enter upon the path of reflection.  And we have seen, I hope, that
there is much truth, as well as some misconception, contained in the
rather vague opinions of the plain man.

But the problems that we have taken up by no means exhaust the series of
those that present themselves to one who thinks with patience and
persistency.  When we have decided that men are not mistaken in believing
that an external world is presented in their experience; when we have
corrected our first crude notions of what this world is, and have cleared
away some confusions from our conceptions of space and time; when we have
attained to a reasonably clear view of the nature of the mind, and of the
nature of its connection with the body; when we have escaped from a
tumble into the absurd doctrine that no mind exists save our own, and
have turned our backs upon the rash speculations of the adherents of
"mind-stuff"; there still remain many points upon which we should like to
have definite information.

In the present chapter I shall take up and turn over a few of these, but
it must not be supposed that one can get more than a glimpse of them
within such narrow limits.  First of all we will raise the question
whether it is permissible to regard the material world, which we accept,
as through and through a mechanism.

There can be little doubt that there is a tendency on the part of men of
science at the present day so to regard it.  It should, of course, be
frankly admitted that no one is in a position to prove that, from the
cosmic mist, in which we grope for the beginnings of our universe, to the
organized whole in which vegetable and animal bodies have their place,
there is an unbroken series of changes all of which are explicable by a
reference to mechanical laws.  Chemistry, physics, and biology are still
separate and distinct realms, and it is at present impossible to find for
them a common basis in mechanics.  The belief of the man of science must,
hence, be regarded as a faith; the doctrine of the mechanism of nature is
a working hypothesis, and it is unscientific to assume that it is
anything more.

There can be no objection to a frank admission that we are not here
walking in the light of established knowledge.  But it does seem to savor
of dogmatism for a man to insist that no increase in our knowledge can
ever reveal that the physical world is an orderly system throughout, and
that all the changes in material things are explicable in terms of the
one unified science.  Earnest objections have, however, been made to the
tendency to regard nature as a mechanism.  To one of the most curious of
them we have been treated lately by Dr. Ward in his book on "Naturalism
and Agnosticism."

It is there ingeniously argued that, when we examine with care the
fundamental concepts of the science of mechanics, we find them to be
self-contradictory and absurd.  It follows that we are not justified in
turning to them for an explanation of the order of nature.

The defense of the concepts of mechanics we may safely leave to the man
of science; remembering, of course, that, when a science is in the
making, it is to be expected that the concepts of which it makes use
should undergo revision from time to time.  But there is one general
consideration that it is not well to leave out of view when we are
contemplating such an assault upon the notion of the world as mechanism
as is made by Dr. Ward.  It is this.

Such attacks upon the conception of mechanism are not purely destructive
in their aim.  The man who makes them wishes to destroy one view of the
system of things in order that he may set up another.  If the changes in
the system of material things cannot be accounted for mechanically, it is
argued, we are compelled to turn for our explanation to the action and
interaction of minds.  This seems to give mind a very important place in
the universe, and is believed to make for a view of things that
guarantees the satisfaction of the highest hopes and aspirations of man.

That a recognition of the mechanical order of nature is incompatible with
such a view of things as is just above indicated, I should be the last to
admit.  The notion that it is so is, I believe, a dangerous error.  It is
an error that tends to put a man out of sympathy with the efforts of
science to discover that the world is an orderly whole, and tempts him to
rejoice in the contemplation of human ignorance.

But the error is rather a common one; and see to what injustice it may
lead one.  It is concluded that the conception of _matter_ is an obscure
one; that we do not know clearly what we mean when we speak of the _mass_
of a body; that there are disputes as to proper significance to be given
to the words _cause_ and _effect_; that the _laws of motion_, as they are
at present formulated, do not seem to account satisfactorily for the
behavior of all material particles.  From this it is inferred that we
must give up the attempt to explain mechanically the order of physical
things.

Now, suppose that it were considered a dangerous and heterodox doctrine,
that the changes in the system of things are due to the activities of
minds.  Would not those who now love to point out the shortcomings of the
science of mechanics discover a fine field for their destructive
criticism?  Are there no disputes as to the ultimate nature of mind?  Are
men agreed touching the relations of mind and matter?  What science even
attempts to tell us how a mind, by an act of volition, sets material
particles in motion or changes the direction of their motion?  How does
one mind act upon another, and what does it mean for one mind to act upon
another?

If the science of mechanics is not in all respects as complete a science
as it is desirable that it should be, surely we must admit that when we
turn to the field of mind we are not dealing with what is clear and free
from difficulties.  Only a strong emotional bias can lead a man to dwell
with emphasis upon the difficulties to be met with in the one field, and
to pass lightly over those with which one meets in the other.

One may, however, refuse to admit that the order of nature is throughout
mechanical, without taking any such unreasonable position as this.  One
may hold that many of the changes in material things do not _appear_ to
be mechanical, and that it is too much of an assumption to maintain that
they are such, even as an article of faith.  Thus, when we pass from the
world of the inorganic to that of organic life, we seem to make an
immense step.  No one has even begun to show us that the changes that
take place in vegetable and animal organisms are all mechanical changes.
How can we dare to assume that they are?

With one who reasons thus we may certainly feel a sympathy.  The most
ardent advocate of mechanism must admit that his doctrine is a working
hypothesis, and not _proved_ to be true.  Its acceptance would, however,
be a genuine convenience from the point of view of science, for it does
introduce, at least provisionally, a certain order into a vast number of
facts, and gives a direction to investigation.  Perhaps the wisest thing
to do is, not to combat the doctrine, but to accept it tentatively and to
examine carefully what conclusions it may seem to carry with it--how it
may affect our outlook upon the world as a whole.

45. THE PLACE OF MIND IN NATURE.--One of the very first questions which
we think of asking when we contemplate the possibility that the physical
world is throughout a mechanical system is this: How can we conceive
minds to be related to such a system?  That minds, and many minds, do
exist, it is not reasonable to doubt.  What shall we do with them?

One must not misunderstand the mechanical view of things.  When we use
the word "machine," we call before our minds certain gross and relatively
simple mechanisms constructed by man.  Between such and a flower, a
butterfly, and a human body, the difference is enormous.  He who elects
to bring the latter under the title of mechanism cannot mean that he
discerns no difference between them and a steam engine or a printing
press.  He can only mean that he believes he might, could he attain to a
glimpse into their infinite complexity, find an explanation of the
physical changes which take place in them, by a reference to certain
general laws which describe the behavior of material particles everywhere.

And the man who, having extended his notion of mechanism, is inclined to
overlook the fact that animals and men have minds, that thought and
feeling, plan and purpose, have their place in the world, may justly be
accused of a headlong and heedless enthusiasm.  Whatever may be our
opinion on the subject of the mechanism of nature, we have no right to
minimize the significance of thought and feeling and will.  Between that
which has no mind and that which has a mind there is a difference which
cannot be obliterated by bringing both under the concept of mechanism.
It is a difference which furnishes the material for the sciences of
psychology and ethics, and gives rise to a whole world of distinctions
which find no place in the realm of the merely physical.

There are, then, minds as well as bodies; what place shall we assign to
these minds in the system of nature?

Several centuries ago it occurred to the man of science that the material
world should be regarded as a system in which there is constant
transformation, but in which nothing is created.  This way of looking at
things expressed itself formerly in the statement that, through all the
changes that take place in the world, the quantity of matter and motion
remains the same.  To-day the same idea is better expressed in the
doctrine of the eternity of mass and the conservation of energy.  In
plain language, this doctrine teaches that every change in every part of
the physical world, every motion in matter, must be preceded by physical
conditions which may be regarded as the equivalent of the change in
question.

But this makes the physical world a closed system, a something complete
in itself.  Where is there room in such a system for minds?

It does indeed seem hard to find in such a system a place for minds, if
one conceives of minds as does the interactionist.  We have seen (section
36) that the interactionist makes the mind act upon matter very much as
one particle of matter is supposed to act upon another.  Between the
physical and the mental he assumes that there are _causal_ relations;
_i.e._ physical changes must be referred to mental causes sometimes, and
mental changes to physical.  This means that he finds a place for mental
facts by inserting them as links in the one chain of causes and effects
with physical facts.  If he is not allowed to break the chain and insert
them, he does not know what to do with them.

The parallelist has not the same difficulty to face.  He who holds that
mental phenomena must not be built into the one series of causes and
effects with physical phenomena may freely admit that physical phenomena
form a closed series, an orderly system of their own, and he may yet find
a place in the world for minds.  He refuses to regard them as a part of
the world-mechanism, but he _relates_ them to physical things, conceiving
them as _parallel to_ the physical in the sense described (sections
37-39).  He insists that, even if we hold that there are gaps in the
physical order of causes and effects, we cannot conceive these gaps to be
filled by mental phenomena, simply because they are mental phenomena.
They belong to an order of their own.  Hence, the assumption that the
physical series is unbroken does not seem to him to crowd mental
phenomena out of their place in the world at all.  They must, in any
case, occupy the place that is appropriate to them (section 38).

It will be noticed that this doctrine that the chain of physical causes
and effects is nowhere broken, and that mental phenomena are related to
it as the parallelist conceives them to be, makes the world-system a very
orderly one.  Every phenomenon has its place in it, and can be accounted
for, whether it be physical or mental.  To some, the thought that the
world is such an orderly thing is in the highest degree repugnant.  They
object that, in such a world, there is no room for _free-will_; and they
object, further, that there is no room for the _activity of minds_.  Both
of these objections I shall consider in this chapter.

But first, I must say a few words about a type of doctrine lately
insisted upon,[1] which bears some resemblance to interactionism as we
usually meet with it, and, nevertheless, tries to hold on to the doctrine
of the conservation of energy.  It is this:--

The concept of energy is stretched in such a way as to make it cover
mental phenomena as well as physical.  It is claimed that mental
phenomena and physical phenomena are alike "manifestations of energy,"
and that the coming into being of a consciousness is a mere
"transformation," a something to be accounted for by the disappearance
from the physical world of a certain equivalent--perhaps of some motion.
It will be noticed that this is one rather subtle way of obliterating the
distinction between mental phenomena and physical.  In so far it
resembles the interactionist's doctrine.

In criticism of it we may say that he who accepts it has wandered away
from a rather widely recognized scientific hypothesis, and has
substituted for it a very doubtful speculation for which there seems to
be no whit of evidence.  It is, moreover, a speculation repugnant to the
scientific mind, when its significance is grasped.  Shall we assume
without evidence that, when a man wakes in the morning and enjoys a
mental life suspended or diminished during the night, his thoughts and
feelings have come into being at the expense of his body?  Shall we
assume that the mass of his body has been slightly diminished, or that
motions have disappeared in a way that cannot be accounted for by a
reference to the laws of matter in motion?  This seems an extraordinary
assumption, and one little in harmony with the doctrine of the eternity
of mass and the conservation of energy as commonly understood.  We need
not take it seriously so long as it is quite unsupported by evidence.

46. THE ORDER OF NATURE AND "FREE-WILL."--In a world as orderly as, in
the previous section, this world is conceived to be, is there any room
for freedom?  What if the man of science is right in suspecting that the
series of physical causes and effects is nowhere broken?  Must we then
conclude that we are never free?

To many persons it has seemed that we are forced to draw this conclusion,
and it is not surprising that they view the doctrine with dismay.  They
argue: Mental phenomena are made parallel with physical, and the order of
physical phenomena seems to be determined throughout, for nothing can
happen in the world of matter unless there is some adequate cause of its
happening.  If, then, I choose to raise my finger, that movement must be
admitted to have physical causes, and those causes other causes, and so
on without end.  If such a movement must always have its place in a
causal series of this kind, how can it be regarded as a free movement?
It is determined, and not free.

Now, it is far from a pleasant thing to watch the man of science busily
at work trying to prove that the physical world is an orderly system, and
all the while to feel in one's heart that the success of his efforts
condemns one to slavery.  It can hardly fail to make one's attitude
towards science that of alarm and antagonism.  From this I shall try to
free the reader by showing that our freedom is not in the least danger,
and that we may look on unconcerned.

When we approach that venerable dispute touching the freedom of the will,
which has inspired men to such endless discussions, and upon which they
have written with such warmth and even acrimony, the very first thing to
do is to discover what we have a right to mean when we call a man _free_.
As long as the meaning of the word is in doubt, the very subject of the
dispute is in doubt.  When may we, then, properly call a man free?  What
is the normal application of the term?

I raise my finger.  Every man of sense must admit that, under normal
conditions, I can raise my finger or keep it down, _as I please_.  There
is no ground for a difference of opinion so far.  But there is a further
point upon which men differ.  One holds that my "pleasing" and the
brain-change that corresponds to it have their place in the world-order;
that is, he maintains that every volition can be _accounted for_.
Another holds that, under precisely the same circumstances, one may
"please" or not "please"; which means that the "pleasing" cannot be
wholly accounted for by anything that has preceded.  The first man is a
_determinist_, and the second a "_free-willist_."  I beg the reader to
observe that the word "free-willist" is in quotation marks, and not to
suppose that it means simply a believer in the freedom of the will.

When in common life we speak of a man as free, what do we understand by
the word?  Usually we mean that he is free from external compulsion.  If
my finger is held by another, I am not free to raise it.  But I may be
free in this sense, and yet one may demur to the statement that I am a
free man.  If a pistol be held to my head with the remark, "Hands up!" my
finger will mount very quickly, and the bystanders will maintain that I
had no choice.

We speak in somewhat the same way of men under the influence of
intoxicants, of men crazed by some passion and unable to take into
consideration the consequences of their acts, and of men bound by the
spell of hypnotic suggestion.  Indeed, whenever a man is in such a
condition that he is glaringly incapable of leading a normal human life
and of being influenced by the motives that commonly move men, we are
inclined to say that he is not free.

But does it ever occur to us to maintain that, in general, the possession
of a character and the capacity of being influenced by considerations
make it impossible for a man to be free?  Surely not.  If I am a prudent
man, I will invest my money in good securities.  Is it sensible to say
that I cannot have been free in refusing a twenty per cent investment,
_because I am by nature prudent_?  Am I a slave _because I eat when I am
hungry_, and can I partake of a meal freely, only when there is no reason
why I should eat at all?

He who calls me free only when my acts do violence to my nature or cannot
be justified by a reference to anything whatever has strange notions of
freedom.  Patriots, poets, moralists, have had much to say of freedom;
men have lived for it, and have died for it; men love it as they love
their own souls.  Is the object of all this adoration the metaphysical
absurdity indicated above?

To insist that a man is free only in so far as his actions are
unaccountable is to do violence to the meaning of a word in very common
use, and to mislead men by perverting it to strange and unwholesome uses.
Yet this is done by the "free-willist."  He keeps insisting that man is
free, and then goes on to maintain that he cannot be free unless he is
"free."  He does not, unfortunately, supply the quotation marks, and he
profits by the natural mistake in identity.  As he defines freedom it
becomes "freedom," which is a very different thing.

What is this "freedom"?  It is not freedom from external constraint.  It
is not freedom from overpowering passion.  It is freedom from all the
motives, good as well as bad, that we can conceive of as influencing man,
and freedom also from oneself.

It is well to get this quite clear.  The "free-willist" maintains that,
_in so far as a man is "free,"_ his actions cannot be accounted for by a
reference to the order of causes at all--not by a reference to his
character, hereditary or acquired; not by a reference to his
surroundings.  "Free" actions, in so far as they are "free," have, so to
speak, sprung into being out of the void.  What follows from such a
doctrine?  Listen:--

(1) It follows that, in so far as I am "free," I am not the author of
what appear to be my acts; who can be the cause of causeless actions?

(2) It follows that no amount of effort on my part can prevent the
appearance of "free" acts of the most deplorable kind.  If one can
condition their appearance or non-appearance, they are not "free" acts.

(3) It follows that there is no reason to believe that there will be any
congruity between my character and my "free" acts.  I may be a saint by
nature, and "freely" act like a scoundrel.

(4) It follows that I can deserve no credit for "free" acts.  I am not
their author.

(5) It follows that, in so far as I am "free," it is useless to praise
me, to blame me, to punish me, to endeavor to persuade me.  I must be
given over to unaccountable sainthood or to a reprobate mind, as it
happens to happen.  I am quite beyond the pale of society, for my
neighbor cannot influence my "free" acts any more than I can.

(6) It follows that, in so far as I am "free," I am in something very
like a state of slavery; and yet, curiously enough, it is a slavery
without a master.  In the old stories of Fate, men were represented as
puppets in the hand of a power outside themselves.  Here I am a puppet in
no hand; but I am a puppet just the same, for I am the passive spectator
of what appear to be my acts.  I do not do the things I seem to do.  They
are done for me or in me--or, rather, they are not done, but just happen.

Such "freedom" is a wretched thing to offer to a man who longs for
freedom; for the freedom to act out his own impulses, to guide his life
according to his own ideals.  It is a mere travesty on freedom, a fiction
of the philosophers, which inspires respect only so long as one has not
pierced the disguise of its respectable name.  True freedom is not a
thing to be sought in a disorderly and chaotic world, in a world in which
actions are inexplicable and character does not count.  Let us rinse our
minds free of misleading verbal associations, and let us realize that a
"free-will" neighbor would certainly not be to us an object of respect.
He would be as offensive an object to have in our vicinity as a
"free-will" gun or a "free-will" pocketknife.  He would not be a rational
creature.

Our only concern need be for freedom, and this is in no danger in an
orderly world.  We all recognize this truth, in a way.  We hold that a
man of good character freely chooses the good, and a man of evil
character freely chooses evil.  Is not this a recognition of the fact
that the choice is a thing to be accounted for, and is, nevertheless, a
free choice?

I have been considering above the world as it is conceived to be by the
parallelist, but, to the reader who may not incline towards parallelism,
I wish to point out that these reasonings touching the freedom of the
will concern the interactionist just as closely.  They have no necessary
connection with parallelism.  The interactionist, as well as the
parallelist, may be a determinist, a believer in freedom, or he may be a
"free-willist."

He regards mental phenomena and physical phenomena as links in the one
chain of causes and effects.  Shall he hold that certain mental links are
"free-will" links, that they are wholly unaccountable?  If he does, all
that has been said above about the "free-willist" applies to him.  He
believes in a disorderly world, and he should accept the consequences of
his doctrine.

47. THE PHYSICAL WORLD AND THE MORAL WORLD.--I have said a little way
back that, when we think of bodies as having minds, we are introduced to
a world of distinctions which have no place in the realm of the merely
physical.  One of the objections made to the orderly world of the
parallelist was that in it there is no room for the activity of minds.
Before we pass judgment on this matter, we should try to get some clear
notion of what we may mean by the word "activity."  The science of ethics
must go by the board, if we cannot think of men as _doing_ anything, as
acting rightly or acting wrongly.

Let us conceive a billiard ball in motion to come into collision with one
at rest.  We commonly speak of the first ball as active, and of the
second as the passive subject upon which it exercises its activity.  Are
we justified in thus speaking?

In one sense, of course, we are.  As I have several times had occasion to
remark, we are, in common life, justified in using words rather loosely,
provided that it is convenient to do so, and that it does not give rise
to misunderstandings.

But, in a stricter sense, we are not justified in thus speaking, for in
doing so we are carrying over into the sphere of the merely physical a
distinction which does not properly belong there, but has its place in
another realm.  The student of mechanics tells us that the second ball
has affected the first quite as much as the first has affected the
second.  We cannot simply regard the first as cause and the second as
effect, nor may we regard the motion of the first as cause and the
subsequent motion of the second as its effect alone.  _The whole
situation at the one instant_--both balls, their relative positions and
their motion and rest--must be taken as the cause of _the whole situation
at the next instant_, and in this whole situation the condition of the
second ball has its place as well as that of the first.

If, then, we insist that to have causal efficiency is the same thing as
to be active, we should also admit that the second ball was active, and
quite as active as the first.  It has certainly had as much to do with
the total result.  But it offends us to speak of it in this way.  We
prefer to say that the first was active and the second was acted upon.
What is the source of this distinction?

Its original source is to be found in the judgments we pass upon
conscious beings, bodies with minds; and it could never have been drawn
if men had not taken into consideration the relations of minds to the
changes in the physical world.  As carried over to inanimate things it is
a transferred distinction; and its transference to this field is not
strictly justifiable, as has been indicated above.

I must make this clear by an illustration.  I hurry along a street
towards the university, because the hour for my lecture is approaching.
I am struck down by a falling tile.  In my advance up the street I am
regarded as active; in my fall to the ground I am regarded as passive.

Now, looking at both occurrences from the purely physical point of view,
we have nothing before us but a series of changes in the space relations
of certain masses of matter; and in all those changes both my body and
its environment are concerned.  As I advance, my body cannot be regarded
as the sole cause of the changes which are taking place.  My progress
would be impossible without the aid of the ground upon which I tread.
Nor can I accuse the tile of being the sole cause of my demolition.  Had
I not been what I was and where I was, the tile would have fallen in
vain.  I must be regarded as a concurrent cause of my own disaster, and
my unhappy state is attributable to me as truly as it is to the tile.

Why, then, am I in the one case regarded as active and in the other as
passive?  In each case I am a cause of the result.  How does it happen
that, in the first instance, I seem to most men to be _the_ cause, and in
the second to be not a cause at all?  The rapidity of my motion in the
first instance cannot account for this judgment.  He who rides in the
police van and he who is thrown from the car of a balloon may move with
great rapidity and yet be regarded as passive.

Men speak as they do because they are not content to point out the
physical antecedents of this and that occurrence and stop with that.
They recognize that, between my advance up the street and my fall to the
ground there is one very important difference.  In the first case what is
happening _may be referred to an idea in my mind_.  Were the idea not
there, I should not do what I am doing.  In the second case, what has
happened _cannot be referred to an idea in my mind_.

Here we have come to the recognition that there are such things as
_purposes_ and _ends_; that an idea and some change in the external world
may be related as _plan_ and _accomplishment_.  In other words, we have
been brought face to face with what has been given the somewhat
misleading name of _final cause_.  In so far as that in the bringing
about of which I have had a share is my _end_, I am _active_; in so far
as it is not my end, but comes upon me as something not planned, I am
_passive_.  The enormous importance of the distinction may readily be
seen; it is only in so far as I am a creature who can have purposes, that
_desire_ and _will_, _foresight_ and _prudence_, _right_ and _wrong_, can
have a significance for me.

I have dwelt upon the meaning of the words "activity" and "passivity,"
and have been at pains to distinguish them from cause and effect, because
the two pairs of terms have often been confounded with each other, and
this confusion has given rise to a peculiarly unfortunate error.  It is
this error that lies at the foundation of the objection referred to at
the beginning of this section.

We have seen that certain men of science are inclined to look upon the
physical world as a great system, all the changes in which may be
accounted for by an appeal to physical causes.  And we have seen that the
parallelist regards ideas, not as links in this chain, but as parallel
with physical changes.

It is argued by some that, if this is a true view of things, we must
embrace the conclusion that _the mind cannot be active at all_, that it
can _accomplish nothing_.  We must look upon the mind as an
"epiphenomenon," a useless decoration; and must regard man as "a physical
automaton with parallel psychical states."

Such abuse of one's fellow-man seems unchristian, and it is wholly
uncalled for on any hypothesis.  Our first answer to it is that it seems
to be sufficiently refuted by the experiences of common life.  We have
abundant evidence that men's minds do count for something.  I conclude
that I want a coat, and I order one of my tailor; he believes that I will
pay for it, he wants the money, and he makes the coat; his man desires to
earn his wages and he delivers it.  If I had not wanted the coat, if the
tailor had not wanted my money, if the man had not wanted to earn his
wages, the end would not have been attained.  No philosopher has the
right to deny these facts.

Ah! but, it may be answered, these three "wants" are not supposed to be
the _causes_ of the motions in matter which result in my appearing
well-dressed on Sunday.  They are only _concomitant phenomena_.

To this I reply: What of that?  We must not forget what is meant by such
concomitance (section 39).  We are dealing with a fixed and necessary
relation, not with an accidental one.  If these "wants" had been lacking,
there would have been no coat.  So my second answer to the objector is,
that, on the hypothesis of the parallelist, the relations between mental
phenomena and physical phenomena are just as dependable as that relation
between physical phenomena which we call that of cause and effect.
Moreover, since activity and causality are not the same thing, there is
no ground for asserting that the mind cannot be active, merely because it
is not material and, hence, cannot be, strictly speaking, a cause of
motions in matter.

The plain man is entirely in the right in thinking that minds are active.
The truth is that _nothing can be active except as it has a mind_.  The
relation of purpose and end is the one we have in view when we speak of
the activity of minds.

It is, thus, highly unjust to a man to tell him that he is "a physical
automaton with parallel psychical states," and that he is wound up by
putting food into his mouth.  He who hears this may be excused if he
feels it his duty to emit steam, walk with a jerk, and repudiate all
responsibility for his actions.  Creatures that think, form plans, and
_act_, are not what we call automata.  It is an abuse of language to call
them such, and it misleads us into looking upon them as we have no right
to look upon them.  If men really were automata in the proper sense of
the word, we could not look upon them as wise or unwise, good or bad; in
short, the whole world of moral distinctions would vanish.

Perhaps, in spite of all that has been said in this and in the preceding
section, some will feel a certain repugnance to being assigned a place in
a world as orderly as our world is in this chapter conceived to be--a
world in which every phenomenon, whether physical or mental, has its
definite place, and all are subject to law.  But I suppose our content or
discontent will not be independent of our conception of what sort of a
world we conceive ourselves to be inhabiting.

If we conclude that we are in a world in which God is revealed, if the
orderliness of it is but another name for Divine Providence, we can
scarcely feel the same as we would if we discovered in the world nothing
of the Divine.  I have in the last few pages been discussing the doctrine
of purposes and ends, teleology, but I have said nothing of the
significance of that doctrine for Theism.  The reader can easily see that
it lies at the very foundation of our belief in God.  The only arguments
for theism that have had much weight with mankind have been those which
have maintained there are revealed in the world generally evidences of a
plan and purpose at least analogous to what we discover when we
scrutinize the actions of our fellow-man.  Such arguments are not at the
mercy of either interactionist or parallelist.  On either hypothesis they
stand unshaken.

With this brief survey of some of the most interesting problems that
confront the philosopher, I must content myself here.  Now let us turn
and see how some of the fundamental problems treated in previous chapters
have been approached by men belonging to certain well-recognized schools
of thought.

And since it is peculiarly true in philosophy that, to understand the
present, one must know something of the past, we shall begin by taking a
look at the historical background of the types of philosophical doctrine
to which reference is constantly made in the books and journals of the
day.


[1] Ostwald, "Vorlesungen über Naturphilosophie," s. 396.  Leipzig, 1902.




IV. SOME TYPES OF PHILOSOPHICAL THEORY


CHAPTER XII

THEIR HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

48. THE DOCTRINE OF REPRESENTATIVE PERCEPTION.--We have seen in Chapter
II that it seems to the plain man abundantly evident that he really is
surrounded by material things and that he directly perceives such
things.  This has always been the opinion of the plain man and it seems
probable that it always will be.  It is only when he begins to reflect
upon things and upon his knowledge of them that it occurs to him to
call it in question.

Very early in the history of speculative thought it occurred to men,
however, to ask how it is that we know things, and whether we are sure
we do know them.  The problems of reflection started into life, and
various solutions were suggested.  To tell over the whole list would
take us far afield, and we need not, for the purpose we have in view,
go back farther than Descartes, with whom philosophy took a relatively
new start, and may be said to have become, in spirit and method, at
least, modern.

I have said (section 31) that Descartes (1596-1650) was fairly well
acquainted with the functioning of the nervous system, and has much to
say of the messages which pass along the nerves to the brain.  The same
sort of reasoning that leads the modern psychologist to maintain that
we know only so much of the external world as is reflected in our
sensations led him to maintain that the mind is directly aware of the
ideas through which an external world is represented, but can know the
world itself only indirectly and through these ideas.

Descartes was put to sore straits to prove the existence of an external
world, when he had once thus placed it at one remove from us.  If we
accept his doctrine, we seem to be shut up within the circle of our
ideas, and can find no door that will lead us to a world outside.  The
question will keep coming back: How do we _know_ that, corresponding to
our ideas, there are material things, if we have never perceived, in
any single instance, a material thing?  And the doubt here suggested
may be reinforced by the reflection that the very expression "a
material thing" ought to be meaningless to a man who, having never had
experience of one, is compelled to represent it by the aid of something
so different from it as ideas are supposed to be.  Can material things
really be to such a creature anything more than some complex of ideas?

The difficulties presented by any philosophical doctrine are not always
evident at once.  Descartes made no scruple of accepting the existence
of an external world, and his example has been followed by a very large
number of those who agree with his initial assumption that the mind
knows immediately only its own ideas.

Preëminent among such we must regard John Locke, the English
philosopher (1632-1704), whose classic work, "An Essay concerning Human
Understanding," should not be wholly unknown to any one who pretends to
an interest in the English literature.

Admirably does Locke represent the position of what very many have
regarded as the prudent and sensible man,--the man who recognizes that
ideas are not external things, and that things must be known through
ideas, and yet holds on to the existence of a material world which we
assuredly know.

He recognizes, it is true, that some one may find a possible opening
for the expression of a doubt, but he regards the doubt as gratuitous;
"I think nobody can, in earnest, be so skeptical as to be uncertain of
the existence of those things which he sees and feels."  As we have
seen (section 12), he meets the doubt with a jest.

Nevertheless, those who read with attention Locke's admirably clear
pages must notice that he does not succeed in really setting to rest
the doubt that has suggested itself.  It becomes clear that Locke felt
so sure of the existence of the external world because he now and then
slipped into the inconsistent doctrine that he perceived it
immediately, and not merely through his ideas.  Are those things "which
he sees and feels" _external_ things?  Does he see and feel them
directly, or must he infer from his ideas that he sees and feels them?
If the latter, why may one not still doubt?  Evidently the appeal is to
a direct experience of material things, and Locke has forgotten that he
must be a Lockian.

"I have often remarked, in many instances," writes Descartes, "that
there is a great difference between an object and its idea."  How could
the man possibly have remarked this, when he had never in his life
perceived the object corresponding to any idea, but had been altogether
shut up to ideas?  "Thus I see, whilst I write this," says Locke,[1] "I
can change the appearance of the paper, and by designing the letters
tell beforehand what new idea it shall exhibit the very next moment, by
barely drawing my pen over it, which will neither appear (let me fancy
as much as I will), if my hand stands still, or though I move my pen,
if my eyes be shut; nor, when those characters are once made on the
paper, can I choose afterward but see them as they are; that is, have
the ideas of such letters as I have made.  Whence it is manifest, that
they are not barely the sport and play of my own imagination, when I
find that the characters that were made at the pleasure of my own
thought do not obey them; nor yet cease to be, whenever I shall fancy
it; but continue to affect the senses constantly and regularly,
according to the figures I made them."

Locke is as bad as Descartes.  Evidently he regards himself as able to
turn to the external world and perceive the relation that things hold
to ideas.  Such an inconsistency may escape the writer who has been
guilty of it, but it is not likely to escape the notice of all those
who come after him.  Some one is sure to draw the consequences of a
doctrine more rigorously, and to come to conclusions, it may be, very
unpalatable to the man who propounded the doctrine in the first
instance.

The type of doctrine represented by Descartes and Locke is that of
_Representative Perception_.  It holds that we know real external
things only through their mental representatives.  It has also been
called _Hypothetical Realism_, because it accepts the existence of a
real world, but bases our knowledge of it upon an inference from our
sensations or ideas.

49. THE STEP TO IDEALISM.--The admirable clearness with which Locke
writes makes it the easier for his reader to detect the untenability of
his position.  He uses simple language, and he never takes refuge in
vague and ambiguous phrases.  When he tells us that the mind is wholly
shut up to its ideas, and then later assumes that it is not shut up to
its ideas, but can perceive external things, we see plainly that there
must be a blunder somewhere.

George Berkeley (1684-1753), Bishop of Cloyne, followed out more
rigorously the consequences to be deduced from the assumption that all
our direct knowledge is of ideas; and in a youthful work of the highest
genius entitled "The Principles of Human Knowledge," he maintained that
there is no material world at all.

When we examine with care the objects of sense, the "things" which
present themselves to us, he argues, we find that they resolve
themselves into sensations, or "ideas of sense."  What can we mean by
the word "apple," if we do not mean the group of experiences in which
alone an apple is presented to us?  The word is nothing else than a
name for this group as a group.  Take away the color, the hardness, the
odor, the taste; what have we left?  And color, hardness, odor, taste,
and anything else that may be referred to any object as a quality, can
exist, he claims, only in a perceiving mind; for such things are
nothing else than sensations, and how can there be an unperceived
sensation?

The things which we perceive, then, he calls complexes of ideas.  Have
we any reason to believe that these ideas, which exist in the mind, are
to be accepted as representatives of things of a different kind, which
are not mental at all?  Not a shadow of a reason, says Berkeley; there
is simply no basis for inference at all, and we cannot even make clear
what it is that we are setting out to infer under the name of matter.
We need not, therefore, grieve over the loss of the material world, for
we have suffered no loss; one cannot lose what one has never had.

Thus, the objects of human knowledge, the only things of which it means
anything to speak, are: (1) Ideas of Sense; (2) Ideas of Memory and
Imagination; (3) The Passions and Operations of the Mind; and (4) The
Self that perceives all These.

From Locke's position to that of Berkeley was a bold step, and it was
much criticised, as well it might be.  It was felt then, as it has been
felt by many down to our own time, that, when we discard an external
world distinct from our ideas, and admit only the world revealed in our
ideas, we really do lose.

It is legitimate to criticise Berkeley, but it is not legitimate to
misunderstand him; and yet the history of his doctrine may almost be
called a chronicle of misconceptions.  It has been assumed that he drew
no distinction between real things and imaginary things, that he made
the world no better than a dream, etc.  Arbuthnot, Swift, and a host of
the greater and lesser lights in literature, from his time to ours,
have made merry over the supposed unrealities in the midst of which the
Berkeleian must live.

But it should be remembered that Berkeley tried hard to do full justice
to the world of things in which we actually find ourselves; not a
hypothetical, inferred, unperceived world, but the world of the things
we actually perceive.  He distinguished carefully between what is real
and what is merely imaginary, though he called both "ideas"; and he
recognized something like a system of nature.  And, by the argument
from analogy which we have already examined (section 41), he inferred
the existence of other finite minds and of a Divine Mind.

But just as John Locke had not completely thought out the consequences
which might be deduced from his own doctrines, so Berkeley left, in his
turn, an opening for a successor.  It was possible for that acutest of
analysts, David Hume (1711-1776), to treat him somewhat as he had
treated Locke.

Among the objects of human knowledge Berkeley had included the _self_
that perceives things.  He never succeeded in making at all clear what
he meant by this object; but he regarded it as a substance, and
believed it to be a cause of changes in ideas, and quite different in
its nature from all the ideas attributed to it.  But Hume maintained
that when he tried to get a good look at this self, to catch it, so to
speak, and to hold it up to inspection, he could not find anything
whatever save perceptions, memories, and other things of that kind.
The self is, he said, "but a bundle or collection of different
perceptions which succeed each other with inconceivable rapidity, and
are in a perpetual flux and movement."

As for the objects of sense, our own bodies, the chairs upon which we
sit, the tables at which we write, and all the rest--these, argues
Hume, we are impelled by nature to think of as existing continuously,
but we have no evidence whatever to prove that they do thus exist.  Are
not the objects of sense, after all, only sensations or impressions?
Do we not experience these sensations or impressions interruptedly?
Who sees or feels a table continuously day after day?  If the table is
but a name for the experiences in question, if we have no right to
infer material things behind and distinct from such experiences, are we
not forced to conclude that the existence of the things that we see and
feel is an interrupted one?

Hume certainly succeeded in raising more questions than he succeeded in
answering.  We are compelled to admire the wonderful clearness and
simplicity of his style, and the acuteness of his intellect, in every
chapter.  But we cannot help feeling that he does injustice to the
world in which we live, even when we cannot quite see what is wrong.
Does it not seem certain to science and to common sense that there is
an order of nature in some sense independent of our perceptions, so
that objects may be assumed to exist whether we do or do not perceive
them?

When we read Hume we have a sense that we are robbed of our real
external world; and his account of the mind makes us feel as a badly
tied sheaf of wheat may be conceived to feel--in danger of falling
apart at any moment.  Berkeley we unhesitatingly call an _Idealist_,
but whether we shall apply the name to Hume depends upon the extension
we are willing to give to it.  His world is a world of what we may
broadly call _ideas_; but the tendencies of his philosophy have led
some to call it a _Skepticism_.

50. THE REVOLT OF "COMMON SENSE."--Hume's reasonings were too important
to be ignored, and his conclusions too unpalatable to satisfy those who
came after him.  It seemed necessary to seek a way of escape out of
this world of mere ideas, which appeared to be so unsatisfactory a
world.  One of the most famous of such attempts was that made by the
Scotchman Thomas Reid (1710-1796).

At one time Reid regarded himself as the disciple of Berkeley, but the
consequences which Hume deduced from the principles laid down by the
former led Reid to feel that he must build upon some wholly different
foundation.  He came to the conclusion that the line of philosophers
from Descartes to Hume had made one capital error in assuming "that
nothing is perceived but what is in the mind that perceives it."

Once admit, says Reid, that the mind perceives nothing save ideas, and
we must also admit that it is impossible to prove the existence either
of an external world or of a mind different from "a bundle of
perceptions."  Hence, Reid maintains that we perceive--not infer, but
perceive--_things_ external to the mind.  He writes:[2]--

"Let a man press his hand against the table--_he feels it hard_.  But
what is the meaning of this?  The meaning undoubtedly is, that he hath
a certain feeling of touch, from which he concludes, without any
reasoning, or comparing ideas, that there is something external really
existing, whose parts stick so firmly together that they cannot be
displaced without considerable force.

"There is here a feeling, and a conclusion drawn from it, or some way
suggested by it.  In order to compare these, we must view them
separately, and then consider by what tie they are connected, and
wherein they resemble one another.  The hardness of the table is the
conclusion, the feeling is the medium by which we are led to that
conclusion.  Let a man attend distinctly to this medium, and to the
conclusion, and he will perceive them to be as unlike as any two things
in nature.  The one is a sensation of the mind, which can have no
existence but in a sentient being; nor can it exist one moment longer
than it is felt; the other is in the table, and we conclude, without
any difficulty, that it was in the table before it was felt, and
continues after the feeling is over.  The one implies no kind of
extension, nor parts, nor cohesion; the other implies all these.  Both,
indeed, admit of degrees, and the feeling, beyond a certain degree, is
a species of pain; but adamantine hardness does not imply the least
pain.

"And as the feeling hath no similitude to hardness, so neither can our
reason perceive the least tie or connection between them; nor will the
logician ever be able to show a reason why we should conclude hardness
from this feeling, rather than softness, or any other quality
whatsoever.  But, in reality, all mankind are led by their constitution
to conclude hardness from this feeling."

It is well worth while to read this extract several times, and to ask
oneself what Reid meant to say, and what he actually said.  He is
objecting, be it remembered, to the doctrine that the mind perceives
immediately only its own ideas or sensations and must infer all else.
His contention is that we _perceive_ external things.

Does he say this?  He says that we have feelings of touch _from which
we conclude_ that there is something external; that there is a feeling,
"_and a conclusion drawn from it, or some way suggested by it_;" that
"the hardness of the table is the _conclusion_, and the feeling is the
_medium_ by which we are _led to the conclusion_."

Could Descartes or Locke have more plainly supported the doctrine of
representative perception?  How could Reid imagine he was combatting
that doctrine when he wrote thus?  The point in which he differs from
them is this: he maintains that we draw the conclusion in question
without any reasoning, and, indeed, in the absence of any conceivable
reason why we should draw it.  We do it instinctively; we are led by
the constitution of our nature.

In effect Reid says to us: When you lay your hand on the table, you
have a sensation, it is true, but you also know the table is hard.  How
do you know it?  I cannot tell you; you simply know it, and cannot help
knowing it; and that is the end of the matter.

Reid's doctrine was not without its effect upon other philosophers.
Among them we must place Sir William Hamilton (1788-1856), whose
writings had no little influence upon British philosophy in the last
half of the last century.

Hamilton complained that Reid did not succeed in being a very good
_Natural Realist_, and that he slipped unconsciously into the position
he was concerned to condemn.  Sir William tried to eliminate this
error, but the careful reader of his works will find to his amusement
that this learned author gets his feet upon the same slippery descent.
And much the same thing may be said of the doctrine of Herbert Spencer
(1820-1903), who claims that, when we have a sensation, we know
directly that there is an external thing, and then manages to sublimate
that external thing into an Unknowable, which we not only do not know
directly, but even do not know at all.

All of these men were anxious to avoid what they regarded as the perils
of Idealism, and yet they seem quite unable to retain a foothold upon
the position which they consider the safer one.

Reid called his doctrine the philosophy of "Common Sense," and he
thought he was coming back from the subtleties of the metaphysicians to
the standpoint of the plain man.  That he should fall into difficulties
and inconsistencies is by no means surprising.  As we have seen
(section 12), the thought of the plain man is far from clear.  He
certainly believes that we perceive an external world of things, and
the inconsistent way in which Descartes and Locke appeal from ideas to
the things themselves does not strike him as unnatural.  Why should not
a man test his ideas by turning to things and comparing the former with
the latter?  On the other hand, he knows that to perceive things we
must have sense organs and sensations, and he cannot quarrel with the
psychologists for saying that we know things only in so far as they are
revealed to us through our sensations.  How does he reconcile these two
positions?  He does not reconcile them.  He accepts them as they stand.

Reid and various other philosophers have tried to come back to "Common
Sense" and to stay there.  Now, it is a good position to come back to
for the purpose of starting out again.  The experience of the plain
man, the truths which he recognizes as truths, these are not things to
be despised.  Many a man whose mind has been, as Berkeley expresses it,
"debauched by learning," has gotten away from them to his detriment,
and has said very unreasonable things.  But "Common Sense" cannot be
the ultimate refuge of the philosopher; it can only serve him as
material for investigation.  The scholar whose thought is as vague and
inconsistent as that of the plain man has little profit in the fact
that the apparatus of his learning has made it possible for him to be
ponderously and unintelligibly vague and inconsistent.

Hence, we may have the utmost sympathy with Reid's protest against the
doctrine of representative perception, and we may, nevertheless,
complain that he has done little to explain how it is that we directly
know external things and yet cannot be said to know things except in so
far as we have sensations or ideas.

51. THE CRITICAL PHILOSOPHY.--The German philosopher, Immanuel Kant
(1724-1804), was moved, by the skeptical conclusions to which Hume's
philosophy seemed to lead, to seek a way of escape, somewhat as Reid
was.  But he did not take refuge in "Common Sense"; he developed an
ingenious doctrine which has had an enormous influence in the
philosophical world, and has given rise to a Kantian literature of such
proportions that no man can hope to read all of it, even if he devotes
his life to it.  In Germany and out of it, it has for a hundred years
and more simply rained books, pamphlets, and articles on Kant and his
philosophy, some of them good, many of them far from clear and far from
original.  Hundreds of German university students have taken Kant as
the subject of the dissertation by which they hoped to win the degree
of Doctor of Philosophy;--I was lately offered two hundred and
seventy-four such dissertations in one bunch;--and no student is
supposed to have even a moderate knowledge of philosophy who has not an
acquaintance with that famous work, the "Critique of Pure Reason."

It is to be expected from the outset that, where so many have found so
much to say, there should reign abundant differences of opinion.  There
are differences of opinion touching the interpretation of Kant, and
touching the criticisms which may be made upon, and the development
which should be given to, his doctrine.  It is, of course, impossible
to go into all these things here; and I shall do no more than indicate,
in untechnical language and in briefest outline, what he offers us in
place of the philosophy of Hume.

Kant did not try to refute, as did Reid, the doctrine, urged by
Descartes and by his successors, that all those things which the mind
directly perceives are to be regarded as complexes of ideas.  On the
contrary, he accepted it, and he has made the words "phenomenon" and
"noumenon" household words in philosophy.

The world which seems to be spread out before us in space and time is,
he tells us, a world of things _as they are revealed to our senses and
our intelligence_; it is a world of manifestations, of phenomena.  What
things-in-themselves are like we have no means of knowing; we know only
things as they appear to us.  We may, to be sure, talk of a something
distinct from phenomena, a something not revealed to the senses, but
thought of, a _noumenon_; but we should not forget that this is a
negative conception; there is nothing in our experience that can give
it a filling, for our experience is only of phenomena.  The reader will
find an unmistakable echo of this doctrine in Herbert Spencer's
doctrine of the "Unknowable" and its "manifestations."

Now, Berkeley had called all the things we immediately perceive
_ideas_.  As we have seen, he distinguished between "ideas of sense"
and "ideas of memory and imagination."  Hume preferred to give to these
two classes different names--he called the first _impressions_ and the
second _ideas_.

The associations of the word "impression" are not to be mistaken.
Locke had taught that between ideas in the memory and genuine
sensations there is the difference that the latter are due to the
"brisk acting" of objects without us.  Objects impress us, and we have
sensations or impressions.  To be sure, Hume, after employing the word
"impression," goes on to argue that we have no evidence that there are
external objects, which cause impressions.  But he retains the word
"impression," nevertheless, and his use of it perceptibly colors his
thought.

In Kant's distinction between phenomena and noumena we have the lineal
descendant of the old distinction between the circle of our ideas and
the something outside of them that causes them and of which they are
supposed to give information.  Hume said we have no reason to believe
such a thing exists, but are impelled by our nature to believe in it.
Kant is not so much concerned to prove the nonexistence of noumena,
things-in-themselves, as he is to prove that the very conception is an
empty one.  His reasonings seem to result in the conclusion that we can
make no intelligible statement about things so cut off from our
experience as noumena are supposed to be; and one would imagine that he
would have felt impelled to go on to the frank declaration that we have
no reason to believe in noumena at all, and had better throw away
altogether so meaningless and useless a notion.  But he was a
conservative creature, and he did not go quite so far.

So far there is little choice between Kant and Hume.  Certainly the
former does not appear to have rehabilitated the external world which
had suffered from the assaults of his predecessors.  What important
difference is there between his doctrine and that of the man whose
skeptical tendencies he wished to combat?

The difference is this: Descartes and Locke had accounted for our
knowledge of things by maintaining that things act upon us, and make an
impression or sensation--that their action, so to speak, begets ideas.
This is a very ancient doctrine as well as a very modern one; it is the
doctrine that most men find reasonable even before they devote
themselves to the study of philosophy.  The totality of such
impressions received from the external world, they are accustomed to
regard as our _experience_ of external things; and they are inclined to
think that any knowledge of external things not founded upon experience
can hardly deserve the name of knowledge.

Now, Hume, when he cast doubt upon the existence of external things,
did not, as I have said above, divest himself of the suggestions of the
word "impression."  He insists strenuously that all our knowledge is
founded upon experience; and he holds that no experience can give us
knowledge that is necessary and universal.  We know things as they are
revealed to us in our experience; but who can guarantee that we may not
have new experiences of a quite different kind, and which flatly
contradict the notions which we have so far attained of what is
possible and impossible, true and untrue.

It is here that Kant takes issue with Hume.  A survey of our knowledge
makes clear, he thinks, that we are in the possession of a great deal
of information that is not of the unsatisfactory kind that, according
to Hume, all our knowledge of things must be.  There, for example, are
all the truths of mathematics.  When we enunciate a truth regarding the
relations of the lines and angles of a triangle, we are not merely
unfolding in the predicate of our proposition what was implicitly
contained in the subject.  There are propositions that do no more than
this; they are _analytical_, _i.e._ they merely analyze the subject.
Thus, when we say: Man is a rational animal, we may merely be defining
the word "man"--unpacking it, so to speak.  But a _synthetic_ judgment
is one in which the predicate is not contained in the subject; it adds
to one's information.  The mathematical truths are of this character.
So also is the truth that everything that happens must have a cause.

Do we connect things with one another in this way merely because we
have had _experience_ that they are thus connected?  Is it because they
are _given_ to us connected in this way?  That cannot be the case, Kant
argues, for what is taken up as mere experienced act cannot be known as
universally and necessarily true.  We perceive that these things _must_
be so connected.  How shall we explain this necessity?

We can only explain it, said Kant, in this way: We must assume that
what is given us from without is merely the raw material of sensation,
the _matter_ of our experience; and that the ordering of this matter,
the arranging it into a world of phenomena, the furnishing of _form_,
is the work of the mind.  Thus, we must think of space, time,
causality, and of all other relations which obtain between the elements
of our experience, as due to the nature of the mind.  It perceives the
world of phenomena that it does, because it _constructs_ that world.
Its knowledge of things is stable and dependable because it cannot know
any phenomenon which does not conform to its laws.  The water poured
into a cup must take the shape of the cup; and the raw materials poured
into a mind must take the form of an orderly world, spread out in space
and time.

Kant thought that with this turn he had placed human knowledge upon a
satisfactory basis, and had, at the same time, indicated the
limitations of human knowledge.  If the world we perceive is a world
which we make; if the forms of thought furnished by the mind have no
other function than the ordering of the materials furnished by sense;
then what can we say of that which may be beyond phenomena?  What of
_noumena_?

It seems clear that, on Kant's principles, we ought not to be able to
say anything whatever of _noumena_.  To say that such may exist appears
absurd.  All conceivable connection between them and existing things as
we know them is cut off.  We cannot think of a noumenon as a
_substance_, for the notions of substance and quality have been
declared to be only a scheme for the ordering of phenomena.  Nor can we
think of one as a cause of the sensations that we unite into a world,
for just the same reason.  We are shut up logically to the world of
phenomena, and that world of phenomena is, after all, the successor of
the world of ideas advocated by Berkeley.

This is not the place to discuss at length the value of Kant's
contribution to philosophy.[3]  There is something terrifying in the
prodigious length at which it seems possible for men to discuss it.
Kant called his doctrine "Criticism," because it undertook to establish
the nature and limits of our knowledge.  By some he has been hailed as
a great enlightener, and by others he has been accused of being as
dogmatic in his assumptions as those whom he disapproved.

But one thing he certainly has accomplished.  He has made the words
"phenomena" and "noumena" familiar to us all, and he has induced a vast
number of men to accept it as established fact that it is not worth
while to try to extend our knowledge beyond phenomena.  One sees his
influence in the writings of men who differ most widely from one
another.


[1] "Essay," Book IV, Chapter XI, section 7.

[2] "An Inquiry into the Human Mind," Chapter V, section 5.

[3] The reader will find a criticism of the Critical Philosophy in
Chapter XV.




CHAPTER XIII

REALISM AND IDEALISM

52. REALISM.--The plain man is a realist.  That is to say, he believes
in a world which is not to be identified with his own ideas or those of
any other mind.  At the same time, as we have seen (section 12), the
distinction between the mind and the world is by no means clear to him.
It is not difficult, by judicious questioning, to set his feet upon the
slippery descent that shoots a man into idealism.

The vague realism of the plain man may be called _Naïve_ or
_Unreflective Realism_.  It has been called by some _Natural Realism_,
but the latter term is an unfortunate one.  It is, of course, natural
for the unreflective man to be unreflective, but, on the other hand, it
is also natural for the reflective man to be reflective.  Besides, in
dubbing any doctrine "natural," we are apt to assume that doctrines
contrasted with it may properly be called "unnatural" or "artificial."
It is an ancient rhetorical device, to obtain sympathy for a cause in
which one may happen to be interested by giving it a taking name; but
it is a device frowned upon by logic and by good sense.

One kind of realism is, then, naïve realism.  It is the position from
which we all set out, when we begin to reflect upon the system of
things.  It is the position to which some try to come back, when their
reflections appear to be leading them into strange or unwelcome paths.

We have seen how Thomas Reid (section 50) recoiled from the conclusions
to which the reasonings of the philosophers had brought him, and tried
to return to the position of the plain man.  The attempt was a failure,
and was necessarily a failure, for Reid tried to come back to the
position of the plain man _and still be a philosopher_.  He tried to
live in a cloud and, nevertheless, to see clearly--a task not easy to
accomplish.

It should be remarked, however, that he tried, at least, to insist that
we know the external world _directly_.  We may divide realists into two
broad classes, those who hold to this view, and those who maintain that
we know it only indirectly and through our ideas.

The plain man belongs, of course, to the first class, if it is just to
speak of a man who says inconsistent things as being wholly in any one
class.  Certainly he is willing to assert that the ground upon which he
stands and the staff in his hand are perceived by him directly.

But we are compelled to recognize that there are subdivisions in this
first class of realists.  Reid tried to place himself beside the plain
man and failed to do so.  Hamilton (section 50) tried also, and he is
not to be classed precisely either with the plain man or with Reid.  He
informs us that the object as it appears to us is a composite something
to the building up of which the knowing mind contributes its share, the
medium through which the object is perceived its share, and the object
in itself its share.  He suggests, by way of illustration, that the
external object may contribute one third.  This seems to make, at
least, _something_ external directly known.  But, on the other hand, he
maintains that the mind knows immediately only what is in immediate
contact with the bodily organ--with the eyes, with the hands, etc.; and
he believes it knows this immediately because it is actually present in
all parts of the body.  And, further, in distinguishing as he does
between existence "as it is in itself" and existence "as it is revealed
to us," and in shutting us up to the latter, he seems to rob us even of
the modicum of externality that he has granted us.

I have already mentioned Herbert Spencer (section 50) as a man not
without sympathy for the attempt to rehabilitate the external world.
He is very severe with the "insanities" of idealism.  He is not willing
even to take the first step toward it.

He writes:[1] "The postulate with which metaphysical reasoning sets out
is that we are primarily conscious only of our sensations--that we
certainly know we have these, and that if there be anything beyond
these serving as cause for them, it can be known only by inference from
them.

"I shall give much surprise to the metaphysical reader if I call in
question this postulate; and the surprise will rise into astonishment
if I distinctly deny it.  Yet I must do this.  Limiting the proposition
to those epiperipheral feelings produced in us by external objects (for
these are alone in question), I see no alternative but to affirm that
the thing primarily known is not that a sensation has been experienced,
but that there exists an outer object."

According to this, the outer object is not known through an inference;
it is known directly.  But do not be in haste to class Spencer with the
plain man, or with Reid.  Listen to a citation once before made
(section 22), but worth repeating in this connection: "When we are
taught that a piece of matter, regarded by us as existing externally,
cannot be really known, but that we can know only certain impressions
produced on us, we are yet, by the relativity of thought, compelled to
think of these in relation to a cause--the notion of a real existence
which generated these impressions becomes nascent.  If it be proved
that every notion of a real existence which we can frame is
inconsistent with itself,--that matter, however conceived by us, cannot
be matter as it actually is,--our conception, though transfigured, is
not destroyed: there remains the sense of reality, dissociated as far
as possible from those special forms under which it was before
represented in thought."

It is interesting to place the two extracts side by side.  In the one,
we are told that we do not know external objects by an inference from
our sensations; in the other we are taught that the piece of matter
which we regard as existing externally cannot be really known; that we
can know only certain impressions produced on us, and must refer them
to a cause; that this cause cannot be what we think it.  It is
difficult for the man who reads such statements not to forget that
Spencer regarded himself as a realist who held to a direct knowledge of
something external.

There are, as it is evident, many sorts of realists that may be
gathered into the first class mentioned above--men who, however
inconsistent they may be, try, at least, to maintain that our knowledge
of the external world is a direct one.  And it is equally true that
there are various sorts of realists that may be put into the second
class.

These men have been called _Hypothetical Realists_.  In the last
chapter it was pointed out that Descartes and Locke belong to this
class.  Both of these men believed in an external world, but believed
that its existence is a thing to be inferred.

Now, when a man has persuaded himself that the mind can know directly
only its own ideas, and must infer the world which they are supposed to
represent, he may conceive of that external world in three different
ways.

(1) He may believe that what corresponds to his idea of a material
object, for example, an apple, is in very many respects like the idea
in his mind.  Thus, he may believe that the odor, taste, color,
hardness, etc., that he perceives directly, or as ideas, have
corresponding to them real external odor, taste, color, hardness, etc.
It is not easy for a man to hold to this position, for a very little
reflection seems to make it untenable; but it is theoretically possible
for one to take it, and probably many persons have inclined to the view
when they have first been tempted to believe that the mind perceives
directly only its ideas.

(2) He may believe that such things as colors, tastes, and odors cannot
be qualities of external bodies at all, but are only effects, produced
upon our minds by something very different in kind.  We seem to
perceive bodies, he may argue, to be colored, to have taste, and to be
odorous; but what we thus perceive is not the external thing; the
external thing that produces these appearances cannot be regarded as
having anything more than "solidity, extension, figure, motion or rest,
and number."  Thus did Locke reason.  To him the external world as it
really exists, is, so to speak, a paler copy of the external world as
we seem to perceive it.  It is a world with fewer qualities, but,
still, a world with qualities of some kind.

(3) But one may go farther than this.  One may say: How can I know that
even the extension, number, and motion of the things which I directly
perceive have corresponding to them extension, number, and motion, in
an outer world?  If what is not colored can cause me to perceive color,
why may not that which is not extended cause me to perceive extension?
And, moved by such reflections, one may maintain that there exists
outside of us that which we can only characterize as an Unknown Cause,
a Reality which we cannot more nearly define.

This last position resembles very closely one side of Spencer's
doctrine--that represented in the last of the two citations, as the
reader can easily see.  It is the position of the follower of Immanuel
Kant who has not yet repudiated the noumenon or thing-in-itself
discussed in the last chapter (section 51).

I am not concerned to defend any one of the varieties of Direct or of
Hypothetical Realism portrayed above.  But I wish to point out that
they all have some sort of claim to the title _Realism_, and to remind
the reader that, when we call a man a realist, we do not do very much
in the way of defining his position.  I may add that the account of the
external world contained in Chapter IV is a sort of realism also.

If this last variety, which I advocate, _must_ be classified, let it be
placed in the first broad class, for it teaches that we know the
external world directly.  But I sincerely hope that it will not be
judged wholly by the company it keeps, and that no one will assign to
it either virtues or defects to which it can lay no just claim.

Before leaving the subject of realism it is right that I should utter a
note of warning touching one very common source of error.  It is
fatally easy for men to be misled by the names which are applied to
things.  Sir William Hamilton invented for a certain type of
metaphysical doctrine the offensive epithet "nihilism."  It is a type
which appeals to many inoffensive and pious men at the present day,
some of whom prefer to call themselves idealists.  Many have been
induced to become "free-willists" because the name has suggested to
them a proper regard for that freedom which is justly dear to all men.
We can scarcely approach with an open mind an account of ideas and
sensations which we hear described as "sensationalism," or worse yet,
as "sensualism."  When a given type of philosophy is set down as
"dogmatism," we involuntarily feel a prejudice against it.

He who reads as reflectively as he should will soon find out that
philosophers "call names" much as other men do, and that one should
always be on one's guard.  "Every form of phenomenalism," asseverated a
learned and energetic old gentleman, who for many years occupied a
chair in one of our leading institutions of learning, "necessarily
leads to atheism."  He inspired a considerable number of students with
such a horror for "phenomenalism" that they never took pains to find
out what it was.

I mention these things in this connection, because I suspect that not a
few in our own day are unduly influenced by the associations which
cling to the words "realism" and "idealism."  Realism in literature, as
many persons understand it, means the degradation of literature to the
portrayal of what is coarse and degrading, in a coarse and offensive
way.  Realism in painting often means the laborious representation upon
canvas of things from which we would gladly avert our eyes if we met
them in real life.  With the word "idealism," on the other hand, we are
apt to connect the possession of ideals, a regard for what is best and
noblest in life and literature.

The reader must have seen that realism in the philosophic sense of the
word has nothing whatever to do with realism in the senses just
mentioned.  The word is given a special meaning, and it is a weakness
to allow associations drawn from other senses of the word to color our
judgment when we use it.

And it should be carefully held in view that the word "idealism" is
given a special sense when it is used to indicate a type of doctrine
contrasted with the doctrine of the realist.  Some forms of
philosophical idealism have undoubtedly been inspiring; but some have
been, and are, far from inspiring.  They should not be allowed to
posture as saints merely because they are cloaked with an ambiguous
name.

53. IDEALISM.--Idealism we may broadly define as the doctrine that all
existence is mental existence.  So far from regarding the external
world as beyond and independent of mind, it maintains that it can have
its being only in consciousness.

We have seen (section 49) how men were led to take the step to
idealism.  It is not a step which the plain man is impelled to take
without preparation.  To say that the real world of things in which we
perceive ourselves to live and move is a something that exists only in
the mind strikes him as little better than insane.  He who becomes an
idealist usually does so, I think, after weighing the arguments
presented by the hypothetical realist, and finding that they seem to
carry one farther than the latter appears to recognize.

The type of idealism represented by Berkeley has been called
_Subjective Idealism_.  Ordinarily our use of the words "subjective"
and "objective" is to call attention to the distinction between what
belongs to the mind and what belongs to the external order of things.
My sensations are subjective, they are referred to my mind, and it is
assumed that they can have no existence except in my mind; the
qualities of things are regarded as objective, that is, it is commonly
believed that they exist independently of my perception of them.

Of course, when a man becomes an idealist, he cannot keep just this
distinction.  The question may, then, fairly be raised: How can he be a
_subjective idealist_?  Has not the word "subjective" lost its
significance?

To this one has to answer: It has, and it has not.  The man who, with
strict consistency, makes the desk at which he sits as much his "idea"
as is the pain in his finger or his memory of yesterday, cannot keep
hold of the distinction of subjective and objective.  But men are not
always as consistent as this.  Remember the illustration of the
"telephone exchange" (section 14).  The mind is represented as situated
at the brain terminals of the sensory nerves; and then brain, nerves,
and all else are turned into ideas in this mind, which are merely
"projected outwards."

Now, in placing the mind at a definite location in the world, and
contrasting it with the world, we retain the distinction between
subjective and objective--what is in the mind can be distinguished from
what is beyond it.  On the other hand, in making the whole system of
external things a complex of ideas in the mind, we become idealists,
and repudiate realism.  The position is an inconsistent one, of course,
but it is possible for men to take it, for men have taken it often
enough.

The idealism of Professor Pearson (section 14) is more palpably
subjective than that of Berkeley, for the latter never puts the mind in
a "telephone exchange."  Nevertheless, he names the objects of sense,
which other men call material things, "ideas," and he evidently
assimilates them to what we commonly call ideas and contrast with
things.  Moreover, he holds them in some of the contempt which men
reserve for "mere ideas," for he believes that idolaters might be
induced to give over worshiping the heavenly bodies could they be
persuaded that these are nothing more than their own ideas.

With the various forms of subjective idealism it is usual to contrast
the doctrine of _Objective Idealism_.  This does not maintain that the
world which I perceive is my "idea"; it maintains that the world is
"idea."

It is rather a nice question, and one which no man should decide
without a careful examination of the whole matter, whether we have any
right to retain the word "idea" when we have rubbed out the distinction
which is usually drawn between ideas and external things.  If we
maintain that all men are always necessarily selfish, we stretch the
meaning of the word quite beyond what is customary, and selfishness
becomes a thing we have no reason to disapprove, since it characterizes
saint and sinner alike.  Similarly, if we decide to name "idea," not
only what the plain man and the realist admit to have a right to that
name, but also the great system which these men call an external
material world, it seems right to ask; Why use the word "idea" at all?
What does it serve to indicate?  Not a distinction, surely, for the
word seems to be applicable to all things without distinction.

Such considerations as these lead me to object to the expression
"objective idealism": if the doctrine is really _objective_, _i.e._ if
it recognizes a system of things different and distinct from what men
commonly call ideas, it scarcely seems to have a right to the title
_idealism_; and if it is really _idealism_, and does not rob the word
idea of all significance, it can scarcely be _objective_ in any proper
sense of the word.

Manifestly, there is need of a very careful analysis of the meaning of
the word "idea," and of the proper significance of the terms
"subjective" and "objective," if error is to be avoided and language
used soberly and accurately.  Those who are not in sympathy with the
doctrine of the objective idealists think that in such careful analysis
and accurate statement they are rather conspicuously lacking.

We think of Hegel (1770-1831) as the typical objective idealist.  It is
not easy to give an accurate account of his doctrine, for he is far
from a clear writer, and he has made it possible for his many admirers
to understand him in many ways.  But he seems to have accepted the
system of things that most men call the real external world, and to
have regarded it as the Divine Reason in its self-development.  And
most of those whom we would to-day be inclined to gather together under
the title of objective idealists appear to have been much influenced,
directly or indirectly, by his philosophy.  There are, however, great
differences of opinion among them, and no man should be made
responsible for the opinions of the class as a class.

I have said a few pages back that some forms of idealism are inspiring,
and that some are not.

Bishop Berkeley called the objects of sense ideas.  He regarded all
ideas as inactive, and thought that all changes in ideas--and this
includes all the changes that take place in nature--must be referred to
the activity of minds.  Some of those changes he could refer to finite
minds, his own and others.  Most of them he could not, and he felt
impelled to refer them to a Divine Mind.  Hence, the world became to
him a constant revelation of God; and he uses the word "God" in no
equivocal sense.  It does not signify to him the system of things as a
whole, or an Unknowable, or anything of the sort.  It signifies a
spirit akin to his own, but without its limitations.  He writes:[2]--

"A human spirit or person is not perceived by sense, as not being an
idea; when, therefore, we see the color, size, figure, and motions of a
man, we perceive only certain sensations or ideas excited in our own
minds; and these being exhibited to our view in sundry distinct
collections serve to mark out unto us the existence of finite and
created spirits like ourselves.  Hence, it is plain we do not see a
man,--if by _man_ is meant that which lives, moves, perceives, and
thinks as we do,--but only such a certain collection of ideas as
directs us to think there is a distinct principle of thought and
motion, like to ourselves, accompanying and represented by it.  And
after the same manner we see God; all the difference is that, whereas
some one finite and narrow assemblage of ideas denotes a particular
human mind, whithersoever we direct our view, we do at all times and in
all places perceive manifest tokens of the Divinity--everything we see,
hear, feel, or any wise perceive by sense, being a sign or effect of
the power of God; as is our perception of those very motions which are
produced by men."

With Berkeley's view of the world as a constant revelation of God, many
men will sympathize who have little liking for his idealism as
idealism.  They may criticise in detail his arguments to prove the
nonexistence of a genuinely external world, but they will be ready to
admit that his doctrine is an inspiring one in the view that it takes
of the world and of man.

With this I wish to contrast the doctrine of another idealist, Mr.
Bradley, whose work, "Appearance and Reality," has been much discussed
in the last few years, in order that the reader may see how widely
different forms of idealism may differ from each other, and how absurd
it is to praise or blame a man's philosophy merely on the ground that
it is idealistic.

Mr. Bradley holds that those aspects of our experience which we are
accustomed to regard as real--qualities of things, the relations
between things, the things themselves, space, time, motion, causation,
activity, the self--turn out when carefully examined to be
self-contradictory and absurd.  They are not real; they are
unrealities, mere appearances.

But these appearances exist, and, hence, must belong to reality.  This
reality must be sentient, for "there is no being or fact outside of
that which is commonly called psychical existence."

Now, what is this reality with which appearances--the whole world of
things which seem to be given in our experience--are contrasted?  Mr.
Bradley calls it the Absolute, and indicates that it is what other men
recognize as the Deity.  How shall we conceive it?

We are told that we are to conceive it as consisting of the contents of
finite minds, or "centers of experience," subjected to "an
all-pervasive transfusion with a reblending of all material."  In the
Absolute, finite things are "transmuted" and lose "their individual
natures."

What does this mean in plain language?  It means that there are many
finite minds of a higher and of a lower order, "centers of experience,"
and that the contents of these are unreal appearances.  There is not a
God or Absolute outside of and distinct from these, but rather one that
in some sense _is their reality_.  This mass of unrealities transfused
and transmuted so that no one of them retains its individual nature is
the Absolute.  That is to say, time must become indistinguishable from
space, space from motion, motion from the self, the self from the
qualities of things, etc., before they are fit to become constituents
of the Absolute and to be regarded as real.

As the reader has seen, this Absolute has nothing in common with the
God in which Berkeley believed, and in which the plain man usually
believes.  It is the night in which all cats are gray, and there
appears to be no reason why any one should harbor toward it the least
sentiment of awe or veneration.

Whether such reasonings as Mr. Bradley's should be accepted as valid or
should not, must be decided after a careful examination into the
foundations upon which they rest and the consistency with which
inferences are drawn from premises.  I do not wish to prejudge the
matter.  But it is worth while to set forth the conclusions at which he
arrives, that it may be clearly realized that the associations which
often hang about the word "idealism" should be carefully stripped away
when we are forming our estimate of this or that philosophical doctrine.


[1] "Principles of Psychology," Part VII, Chapter VI, section 404.

[2] "Principles," section 148.




CHAPTER XIV

MONISM AND DUALISM

54. THE MEANING OF THE WORDS.--In common life men distinguish between
minds and material things, thus dividing the things, which taken
together make up the world as we know it, into two broad classes.  They
think of minds as being very different from material objects, and of
the latter as being very different from minds.  It does not occur to
them to find in the one class room for the other, nor does it occur to
them to think of both classes as "manifestations" or "aspects" of some
one "underlying reality."  In other words, the plain man to-day is a
_Dualist_.

In the last chapter (section 52) I have called him a Naïve Realist; and
here I shall call him a _Naïve Dualist_, for a man may regard mind and
matter as quite distinct kinds of things, without trying to elevate his
opinion, through reflection, into a philosophical doctrine.  The
reflective man may stand by the opinion of the plain man, merely trying
to make less vague and indefinite the notions of matter and of mind.
He then becomes a _Philosophical Dualist_.  There are several varieties
of this doctrine, and I shall consider them a little later (section 58).

But it is possible for one to be less profoundly impressed by the
differences which characterize matter and mind.  One may feel inclined
to refer mental phenomena to matter, and to deny them the prominence
accorded them by the dualist.  On the other hand, one may be led by
one's reflections to resolve material objects into mere ideas, and to
claim that they can have no existence except in a mind.  Finally, it is
possible to hold that both minds and material things, as we know them,
are only manifestations, phenomena, and that they must be referred to
an ulterior "reality" or "substance."  One may claim that they are
"aspects" of the one reality, which is neither matter nor mind.

These doctrines are different forms of _Monism_.  In whatever else they
differ from one another, they agree in maintaining that the universe
does not contain two kinds of things fundamentally different.  Out of
the duality of things as it seems to be revealed to the plain man they
try to make some kind of a unity.

35. MATERIALISM.--The first of the forms of monism above mentioned is
_Materialism_.  It is not a doctrine to which the first impulse of the
plain man leads him at the present time.  Even those who have done no
reading in philosophy have inherited many of their ways of looking at
things from the thinkers who lived in the ages past, and whose opinions
have become the common property of civilized men.  For more than two
thousand years the world and the mind have been discussed, and it is
impossible for any of us to escape from the influence of those
discussions and to look at things with the primitive simplicity of the
wholly untutored.

But it was not always so.  There was a time when men who were not
savages, but possessed great intellectual vigor and much cultivation,
found it easy and natural to be materialists.  This I have spoken of
before (section 30), but it will repay us to take up again a little
more at length the clearest of the ancient forms of materialism, that
of the Atomists, and to see what may be said for and against it.

Democritus of Abdera taught that nothing exists except atoms and empty
space.  The atoms, he maintained, differ from one another in size,
shape, and position.  In other respects they are alike.  They have
always been in motion.  Perhaps he conceived of that motion as
originally a fall through space, but there seems to be uncertainty upon
this point.  However, the atoms in motion collide with one another, and
these collisions result in mechanical combinations from which spring
into being world-systems.

According to this doctrine, nothing comes from nothing, and nothing can
become nonexistent.  All the changes which have ever taken place in the
world are only changes in the position of material particles--they are
regroupings of atoms.  We cannot directly perceive them to be such, for
our senses are too dull to make such fine observations, but our reason
tells us that such is the case.

Where, in such a world as this, is there room for mind, and what can we
mean by mind?  Democritus finds a place for mind by conceiving it to
consist of fine, smooth, round atoms, which are the same as the atoms
which constitute fire.  These are distributed through the whole body,
and lie among the other atoms which compose it.  They are inhaled with
and exhaled into the outer air.  While they are in the body their
functions are different according as they are located in this organ or
in that.  In the brain they give rise to thought, in the heart to
anger, and in the liver to desire.

I suppose no one would care, at the present time, to become a
Democritean.  The "Reason," which tells us that the mind consists of
fine, round atoms, appears to have nothing but its bare word to offer
us.  But, apart from this, a peculiar difficulty seems to face us; even
supposing there are atoms of fire in the brain, the heart, and the
liver, what are the _thought_, _anger_, and _desire_, of which mention
is made?

Shall we conceive of these last as atoms, as void space, or as the
motion of atoms?  There really seems to be no place in the world for
them, and _these are the mind so far as the mind appears to be
revealed_--they are _mental phenomena_.  It does not seem that they are
to be identified with anything that the Atomistic doctrine admits as
existing.  They are simply overlooked.

Is the modern materialism more satisfactory?  About half a century ago
there was in the scientific world something like a revival of
materialistic thinking.  It did not occur to any one to maintain that
the mind consists of fine atoms disseminated through the body, but
statements almost as crude were made.  It was said, for example, that
the brain secretes thought as the liver secretes bile.

It seems a gratuitous labor to criticise such statements as these in
detail.  There are no glands the secretions of which are not as
unequivocally material as are the glands themselves.  This means that
such secretions can be captured and analyzed; the chemical elements of
which they are composed can be enumerated.  They are open to inspection
in precisely the same way as are the glands which secrete them.

Does it seem reasonable to maintain that thoughts and feelings are
related to brains in this way?  Does the chemist ever dream of
collecting them in a test tube, and of drawing up for us a list of
their constituent elements?  When the brain is active, there are, to be
sure, certain material products which pass into the blood and are
finally eliminated from the body; but among these products no one would
be more surprised than the materialist to discover pains and pleasures,
memories and anticipations, desires and volitions.  This talk of
thought as a "secretion" we can afford to set aside.

Nor need we take much more seriously the seemingly more sober statement
that thought is a "function" of the brain.  There is, of course, a
sense in which we all admit the statement; minds are not disembodied,
and we have reason to believe that mind and brain are most intimately
related.  But the word "function" is used in a very broad and loose
sense when it serves to indicate this relation; and one may employ it
in this way without being a materialist at all.  In a stricter sense of
the word, the brain has no functions that may not be conceived as
mechanical changes,--as the motion of atoms in space,--and to identify
mental phenomena with these is inexcusable.  It is not theoretically
inconceivable that, with finer senses, we might directly perceive the
motions of the atoms in another man's brain; it is inconceivable that
we should thus directly perceive his melancholy or his joy; they belong
to another world.

56. SPIRITUALISM.--The name _Spiritualism_ is sometimes given to the
doctrine that there is no existence which we may not properly call mind
or spirit.  It errs in the one direction as materialism errs in the
other.

One must not confound with this doctrine that very different one,
Spiritism, which teaches that a certain favored class of persons called
mediums may bring back the spirits of the departed and enable us to
hold communication with them.  Such beliefs have always existed among
the common people, but they have rarely interested philosophers.  I
shall have nothing to say of them in this book.

There have been various kinds of spiritualists.  The name may be
applied to the idealists, from Berkeley down to those of our day; at
some of the varieties of their doctrine we have taken a glance
(sections 49, 53).  To these we need not recur; but there is one type
of spiritualistic doctrine which is much discussed at the present day
and which appears to appeal strongly to a number of scientific men.  We
must consider it for a moment.

We have examined Professor Clifford's doctrine of Mind-stuff (section
43).  Clifford maintained that all the material things we perceive are
our perceptions--they are in our consciousness, and are not properly
external at all.  But, believing, as he did, that all nature is
animated, he held that every material thing, every perception, may be
taken as a revelation of something not in our consciousness, of a mind
or, at least, of a certain amount of mind-stuff.  How shall we conceive
the relation between what is in our mind and the something
corresponding to it not in our mind?

We must, says Clifford, regard the latter as the _reality_ of which the
former is the _appearance_ or _manifestation_.  "What I perceive as
your brain is really in itself your consciousness, is You; but then
that which I call your brain, the material fact, is merely my
perception."

This doctrine is _Panpsychism_, in the form in which it is usually
brought to our attention.  It holds that the only real existences are
minds, and that physical phenomena must be regarded as the
manifestations under which these real existences make us aware of their
presence.  The term panpsychism may, it is true, be used in a somewhat
different sense.  It may be employed merely to indicate the doctrine
that all nature is animated, and without implying a theory as to the
relation between bodies perceived and the minds supposed to accompany
them.

What shall we say to panpsychism of the type represented by Clifford?
It is, I think, sufficiently answered in the earlier chapters of this
volume:--

(1) If I call material facts my perceptions, I do an injustice to the
distinction between the physical and the mental (Chapter IV).

(2) If I say that all nature is animated, I extend illegitimately the
argument for other minds (Chapter X).

(3) If I say that mind is the reality of which the brain is the
appearance, I misconceive what is meant by the distinction between
appearance and reality (Chapter V).

57. THE DOCTRINE OF THE ONE SUBSTANCE.--In the seventeenth century
Descartes maintained that, although mind and matter may justly be
regarded as two substances, yet it should be recognized that they are
not really independent substances in the strictest sense of the word,
but that there is only one substance, in this sense, and mind and
matter are, as it were, its attributes.

His thought was that by attribute we mean that which is not
independent, but must be referred to something else; by substance, we
mean that which exists independently and is not referred to any other
thing.  It seemed to follow that there could be only one substance.

Spinoza modified Descartes' doctrine in that he refused to regard mind
and matter as substances at all.  He made them unequivocally attributes
of the one and only substance, which he called God.

The thought which influenced Spinoza had impressed many minds before
his time, and it has influenced many since.  One need not follow him in
naming the unitary something to which mind and matter are referred
substance.  One may call it Being, or Reality, or the Unknowable, or
Energy, or the Absolute, or, perhaps, still something else.  The
doctrine has taken many forms, but he who reads with discrimination
will see that the various forms have much in common.

They agree in maintaining that matter and mind, as they are revealed in
our experience, are not to be regarded as, in the last analysis, two
distinct kinds of thing.  They are, rather, modes or manifestations of
one and the same thing, and this is not to be confounded with either.

Those who incline to this doctrine take issue with the materialist, who
assimilates mental phenomena to physical; and they oppose the idealist,
who assimilates physical phenomena to mental, and calls material things
"ideas."  We have no right, they argue, to call that of which ideas and
things are manifestations either mind or matter.  It is to be
distinguished from both.

To this doctrine the title of _Monism_ is often appropriated.  In this
chapter I have used the term in a broader sense, for both the
materialist and the spiritualist maintain that there is in the universe
but one kind of thing.  Nevertheless, when we hear a man called a
monist without qualification, we may, perhaps, be justified in
assuming, in the absence of further information, that he holds to some
one of the forms of doctrine indicated above.  There may be no logical
justification for thus narrowing the use of the term, but logical
justification goes for little in such matters.

Various considerations have moved men to become monists in this sense
of the word.  Some have been influenced by the assumption--one which
men felt impelled to make early in the history of speculative
thought--that the whole universe must be the expression of some unitary
principle.  A rather different argument is well illustrated in the
writings of Professor Höffding, a learned and acute writer of our own
time.  It has influenced so many that it is worth while to delay upon
it.

Professor Höffding holds that mental phenomena and physical phenomena
must be regarded as parallel (see Chapter IX), and that we must not
conceive of ideas and material things as interacting.  He writes:[1]--

"If it is contrary to the doctrine of the persistence of physical
energy to suppose a transition from the one province to the other, and
if, nevertheless, the two provinces exist in our experience as
distinct, then the two sets of phenomena must be unfolded
simultaneously, each according to its laws, so that for every
phenomenon in the world of consciousness there is a corresponding
phenomenon in the world of matter, and conversely (so far as there is
reason to suppose that conscious life is correlated with material
phenomena).  The parallels already drawn point directly to such a
relation; it would be an amazing accident, if, while the characteristic
marks repeated themselves in this way, there were not at the foundation
an inner connection.  Both the _parallelism_ and the _proportionality_
between the activity of consciousness and cerebral activity point to an
_identity_ at bottom.  The difference which remains in spite of the
points of agreement compels us to suppose that one and the same
principle has found its expression in a double form.  We have no right
to take mind and body for two beings or substances in reciprocal
interaction.  We are, on the contrary, impelled to conceive the
material interaction between the elements composing the brain and
nervous system _as an outer form of the inner ideal unity of
consciousness_.  What we in our inner experience become conscious of as
thought, feeling, and resolution, is thus represented in the material
world by certain material processes of the brain, which as such are
subject to the law of the persistence of energy, although this law
cannot be applied to the relation between cerebral and conscious
processes.  It is as though the same thing were said in two languages."

Some monists are in the habit of speaking of the one Being to which
they refer phenomena of all sorts as the "Absolute."  The word is a
vague one, and means very different things in different philosophies.
It has been somewhat broadly defined as "the ultimate principle of
explanation of the universe."  He who turns to one principle of
explanation will conceive the Absolute in one way, and he who turns to
another will, naturally, understand something else by the word.

Thus, the idealist may conceive of the Absolute as an all-inclusive
Mind, of which finite minds are parts.  To Spencer, it is the
Unknowable, a something behind the veil of phenomena.  Sometimes it
means to a writer much the same thing that the word God means to other
men; sometimes it has a significance at the farthest remove from this
(section 53).  Indeed, the word is so vague and ambiguous, and has
proved itself the mother of so many confusions, that it would seem a
desirable thing to drop it out of philosophy altogether, and to
substitute for it some less ambiguous expression.

It seems clear from the preceding pages, that, before one either
accepts or rejects monism, one should very carefully determine just
what one means by the word, and should scrutinize the considerations
which may be urged in favor of the particular doctrine in question.
There are all sorts of monism, and men embrace them for all sorts of
reasons.  Let me beg the reader to bear in mind;--

(1) The monist may be a materialist; he may be an idealist; he may be
neither.  In the last case, he may, with Spinoza, call the one
Substance God; that is, he may be a Pantheist.  On the other hand, he
may, with Spencer, call it the Unknowable, and be an Agnostic.  Other
shades of opinion are open to him, if he cares to choose them.

(2) It does not seem wise to assent hastily to such statements as; "The
universe is the manifestation of one unitary Being"; or: "Mind and
matter are the expression of one and the same principle."  We find
revealed in our experience mental phenomena and physical phenomena.  In
what sense they are one, or whether they are one in any sense,--this is
something to be determined by an examination of the phenomena and of
the relations in which we find them.  It may turn out that the universe
is one only in the sense that all phenomena belong to the one orderly
system.  If we find that this is the case, we may still, if we choose,
call our doctrine monism, but we should carefully distinguish such a
monism from those represented by Höffding and Spencer and many others.
There seems little reason to use the word, when the doctrine has been
so far modified.

58. DUALISM.--The plain man finds himself in a world of physical things
and of minds, and it seems to him that his experience directly
testifies to the existence of both.  This means that the things of
which he has experience appear to belong to two distinct classes.

It does not mean, of course, that he has only two kinds of experiences.
The phenomena which are revealed to us are indefinitely varied; all
physical phenomena are not just alike, and all mental phenomena are not
just alike.

Nevertheless, amid all the bewildering variety that forces itself upon
our attention, there stands out one broad distinction, that of the
physical and the mental.  It is a distinction that the man who has done
no reading in the philosophers is scarcely tempted to obliterate; to
him the world consists of two kinds of things widely different from
each other; minds are not material things and material things are not
minds.  We are justified in regarding this as the opinion of the plain
man even when we recognize that, in his endeavor to make clear to
himself what he means by minds, he sometimes speaks as though he were
talking about something material or semi-material.

Now, the materialist allows these two classes to run together; so does
the idealist.  The one says that everything is matter; the other, that
everything is mind.  It would be foolish to maintain that nothing can
be said for either doctrine, for men of ability have embraced each.
But one may at least say that both seem to be refuted by our common
experience of the world, an experience which, so far as it is permitted
to testify at all, lifts up its voice in favor of _Dualism_.

Dualism is sometimes defined as the doctrine that there are in the
world two kinds of substances, matter and mind, which are different in
kind and should be kept distinct.  There are dualists who prefer to
avoid the use of the word substance, and to say that the world of our
experiences consists of physical phenomena and of mental phenomena, and
that these two classes of facts should be kept separate.

The dualist may maintain that we have a direct knowledge of matter and
of mind, and he may content himself with such a statement, doing little
to make clear what we mean by matter and by mind.  In this case, his
position is little different from that of the plain man who does not
attempt to philosophize.  Thomas Reid (section 50) belongs to this
class.

On the other hand, the dualist may attempt to make clear, through
philosophical reflection, what we mean by the matter and mind which
experience seems to give us.  He may conclude:--

(1) That he must hold, as did Sir William Hamilton, that we perceive
directly only physical and mental phenomena, but are justified in
inferring that, since the phenomena are different, there must be two
kinds of underlying substances to which the phenomena are referred.
Thus, he may distinguish between the two substances and their
manifestations, as some monists distinguish between the one substance
and its manifestations.

(2) Or he may conclude that it is futile to search for substances or
realities of any sort _behind_ phenomena, arguing that such realities
are never revealed in experience, and that no sound reason for their
assumption can be adduced.  In this case, he may try to make plain what
mind and matter are, by simply analyzing our experiences of mind and
matter and coming to a clearer comprehension of their nature.

As the reader has probably remarked, the philosophy presented in the
earlier chapters of this book (Chapters III to XI) is _dualistic_ as
well as _realistic_.  That is to say, it refuses to rub out the
distinction between physical phenomena and mental phenomena, either by
dissolving the material world into ideas; by calling ideas secretions
or functions of the brain; or by declaring them one in a fictitious
entity behind the veil and not supposed to be exactly identical with
either.  And as it teaches that the only reality that it means anything
to talk about must be found in experience, it is a dualism of the type
described in the paragraph which immediately precedes.

Such a philosophy does not seem to do violence to the common experience
of minds and of physical things shared by us all, whether we are
philosophers or are not.  It only tries to make clear what we all know
dimly and vaguely.  This is, I think, a point in its favor.  However,
men of great ability and of much learning have inclined to doctrines
very different; and we have no right to make up our minds on such a
subject as this without trying to give them an attentive and an
impartial hearing.

59. SINGULARISM AND PLURALISM.--There are those who apply to the
various forms of monism the title _Singularism_, and who contrast with
this _Pluralism_, a word which is meant to cover the various doctrines
which maintain that there is more than one ultimate principle or being
in the universe.

It is argued that we should have some word under which we may bring
such a doctrine, for example, as that of the Greek philosopher
Empedocles (born about 490 B.C.).  This thinker made earth, water,
fire, and air the four material principles or "roots" of things.  He
was not a monist, and we can certainly not call him a dualist.

Again.  The term pluralism has been used to indicate the doctrine that
individual finite minds are not parts or manifestations of one
all-embracing Mind,--of God or the Absolute,--but are relatively
independent beings.  This doctrine has been urged in our own time, with
eloquence and feeling, by Professor Howison.[2]  Here we have a
pluralism which is idealistic, for it admits in the universe but one
_kind_ of thing, minds; and yet refuses to call itself monistic.  It
will readily be seen that in this paragraph and in the one preceding
the word is used in different senses.

I have added the above sentences to this chapter that the reader may
have an explanation of the meaning of a word sometimes met with.  But
the title of the chapter is "Monism and Dualism," and it is of this
contrast that it is especially important to grasp the significance.


[1] "Outlines of Psychology," pp. 64-65, English translation, 1891.

[2] "The Limits of Evolution, and Other Essays," revised edition.  New
York, 1905.




CHAPTER XV

RATIONALISM, EMPIRICISM, CRITICISM, AND CRITICAL EMPIRICISM

60. RATIONALISM.--As the content of a philosophical doctrine must be
determined by the _initial assumptions_ which a philosopher makes and
by the _method_ which he adopts in his reasonings, it is well to
examine with some care certain broad differences in this respect which
characterize different philosophers, and which help to explain how it
is that the results of their reflections are so startlingly different.

I shall first speak of _Rationalism_, which I may somewhat loosely
define as the doctrine that the reason can attain truths independently
of observation--can go beyond experienced fact and the deductions which
experience seems to justify us in making from experienced fact.  The
definition cannot mean much to us until it is interpreted by a concrete
example, and I shall turn to such.  It must, however, be borne in mind
that the word "rationalism" is meant to cover a great variety of
opinions, and we have said comparatively little about him when we have
called a man a rationalist in philosophy.  Men may agree in believing
that the reason can go beyond experienced fact, and yet may differ
regarding the particular truths which may be thus attained.

Now, when Descartes found himself discontented with the philosophy that
he and others had inherited from the Middle Ages, and undertook a
reconstruction, he found it necessary to throw over a vast amount of
what had passed as truth, if only with a view to building up again upon
a firmer foundation.  It appeared to him that much was uncritically
accepted as true in philosophy and in the sciences which a little
reflection revealed to be either false or highly doubtful.
Accordingly, he decided to clear the ground by a sweeping doubt, and to
begin his task quite independently.

In accordance with this principle, he rejected the testimony of the
senses touching the existence of a world of external things.  Do not
the senses sometimes deceive us?  And, since men seem to be liable to
error in their reasonings, even in a field so secure as that of
mathematical demonstration, he resolved further to repudiate all the
reasonings he had heretofore accepted.  He would not even assume
himself to be in his right mind and awake; might he not be the victim
of a diseased fancy, or a man deluded by dreams?

Could anything whatever escape this all-devouring doubt?  One truth
seemed unshakable: his own existence, at least, emerged from this sea
of uncertainties.  I may be deceived in thinking that there is an
external world, and that I am awake and really perceive things; but I
surely cannot be deceived unless I exist.  _Cogito, ergo sum_--I think,
hence I exist; this truth Descartes accepted as the first principle of
the new and sounder philosophy which he sought.

As we read farther in Descartes we discover that he takes back again a
great many of those things that he had at the outset rejected as
uncertain.  Thus, he accepts an external world of material things.  How
does he establish its existence?  He cannot do it as the empiricist
does it, by a reference to experienced fact, for he does not believe
that the external world is directly given in our experience.  He thinks
we are directly conscious only of our _ideas_ of it, and must somehow
prove that it exists over against our ideas.

By his principles, Descartes is compelled to fall back upon a curious
roundabout argument to prove that there is a world.  He must first
prove that God exists, and then argue that God would not deceive us
into thinking that it exists when it does not.

Now, when we come to examine Descartes' reasonings in detail we find
what appear to us some very uncritical assumptions.  Thus, he proves
the existence of God by the following argument:--

I exist, and I find in me the idea of God; of this idea I cannot be the
author, for it represents something much greater than I, and its cause
must be as great as the reality it represents.  In other words, nothing
less than God can be the cause of the idea of God which I find in me,
and, hence, I may infer that God exists.

Where did Descartes get this notion that every idea must have a cause
which contains as much external reality as the idea does represented
reality?  How does he prove his assumption?  He simply appeals to what
he calls "the natural light," which is for him a source of all sorts of
information which cannot be derived from experience.  This "natural
light" furnishes him with a vast number of "eternal truths", these he
has not brought under the sickle of his sweeping doubt, and these help
him to build up again the world he has overthrown, beginning with the
one indubitable fact discussed above.

To the men of a later time many of Descartes' eternal truths are simply
inherited philosophical prejudices, the results of the reflections of
earlier thinkers, and in sad need of revision.  I shall not criticise
them in detail.  The important point for us to notice is that we have
here a type of philosophy which depends upon truths revealed by the
reason, independently of experience, to carry one beyond the sphere of
experience.

I again remind the reader that there are all sorts of rationalists, in
the philosophical sense of the word.  Some trust the power of the
unaided reason without reserve.  Thus Spinoza, the pantheist, made the
magnificent but misguided attempt to deduce the whole system of things
physical and things mental from what he called the attributes of God,
Extension and Thought.

On the other hand, one may be a good deal of an empiricist, and yet
something of a rationalist, too.  Thus Professor Strong, in his recent
brilliant book, "Why the Mind has a Body," maintains that we know
intuitively that other minds than our own exist; know it without
gathering our information from experience, and without having to
establish the fact in any way.  This seems, at least, akin to the
doctrine of the "natural light," and yet no one can say that Professor
Strong does not, in general, believe in a philosophy of observation and
experiment.

61. EMPIRICISM.--I suppose every one who has done some reading in the
history of philosophy will, if his mother tongue be English, think of
the name of John Locke when empiricism is mentioned.

Locke, in his "Essay concerning Human Understanding," undertakes "to
inquire into the original, certainty, and extent of human knowledge,
together with the grounds and degrees of belief, opinion, and assent."
His sober and cautious work, which was first published in 1690, was
peculiarly English in character; and the spirit which it exemplifies
animates also Locke's famous successors, George Berkeley (1684-1753),
David Hume (1711-1776), and John Stuart Mill (1806-1873).  Although
Locke was a realist, Berkeley an idealist, Hume a skeptic, and Mill
what has been called a sensationalist; yet all were empiricists of a
sort, and emphasized the necessity of founding our knowledge upon
experience.

Now, Locke was familiar with the writings of Descartes, whose work he
admired, but whose rationalism offended him.  The first book of the
"Essay" is devoted to the proof that there are in the mind of man no
"innate ideas" and no "innate principles."  That is to say, Locke tries
to show that one must not seek, in the "natural light" to which
Descartes turned, a distinct and independent source of information,

"Let us, then," he continues, "suppose the mind to be, as we say, white
paper, void of all characters, without any ideas; how comes it to be
furnished?  Whence comes it by that vast store which the busy and
boundless fancy of man has painted on it, with an almost endless
variety?  Whence has it all the materials of reason and knowledge?  To
this I answer in one word, from experience; in that all our knowledge
is founded, and from that it ultimately derives itself.  Our
observation, employed either about external sensible objects, or about
the internal operations of our minds, perceived and reflected on by
ourselves, is that which supplies our understandings with all the
materials of thinking.  These two are the fountains of knowledge, from
whence all the ideas we have, or can naturally have, do spring." [1]

Thus, all we know and all we ever shall know of the world of matter and
of minds must rest ultimately upon observation,--observation of
external things and of our own mind.  We must clip the erratic wing of
a "reason" which seeks to soar beyond such knowledge; which leaves the
solid earth, and hangs suspended in the void.

"But hold," exclaims the critical reader; "have we not seen that Locke,
as well as Descartes (section 48), claims to know what he cannot prove
by direct observation or even by a legitimate inference from what has
been directly observed?  Does he not maintain that the mind has an
immediate knowledge or experience only of its own ideas?  How can he
prove that there are material extended things outside causing these
ideas?  And if he cannot prove it by an appeal to experience, to direct
observation, is he not, in accepting the existence of the external
world at all, just as truly as Descartes, a rationalist?"

The objection is well taken.  On his own principles, Locke had no right
to believe in an external world.  He has stolen his world, so to speak;
he has taken it by violence.  Nevertheless, as I pointed out in the
section above referred to, Locke is not a rationalist of _malice
prepense_.  He _tries_ to be an empiricist.  He believes in the
external world because he thinks it is directly revealed to the
senses--he inconsistently refers to experience as evidence of its
existence.

It has often been claimed by those who do not sympathize with
empiricism that the empiricists make assumptions much as others do, but
have not the grace to admit it.  I think we must frankly confess that a
man may try hard to be an empiricist and may not be wholly successful.
Moreover, reflection forces us to the conclusion that when we have
defined empiricism as a doctrine which rests throughout upon an appeal
to "experience" we have not said anything very definite.

What is _experience_?  What may we accept as directly revealed fact?
The answer to such questions is far from an easy one to give.  It is a
harder matter to discuss intelligently than any one can at all realize
until he has spent some years in following the efforts of the
philosophers to determine what is "revealed fact."  We are supposed to
have experience of our own minds, of space, of time, of matter.  What
are these things as revealed in our experience?  We have seen in the
earlier chapters of this book that one cannot answer such questions
off-hand.

62.  CRITICISM.--I have in another chapter (section 51) given a brief
account of the philosophy of Immanuel Kant.  He called his doctrine
"Criticism," and he distinguished it from "Dogmatism" and "Empiricism."

Every philosophy that transcends experience, without first critically
examining our faculty of knowledge and determining its right to spread
its wings in this way, Kant calls "dogmatism."  The word seems rather
an offensive one, in its usual signification, at least; and it is as
well not to use it.  As Kant used the word, Descartes was a dogmatist;
but let us rather call him a rationalist.  He certainly had no
intention of proceeding uncritically, as we shall see a little later.
If we call him a dogmatist we seem to condemn him in advance, by
applying to him an abusive epithet.

Empiricism, according to Kant, confines human knowledge to experience,
and thus avoids the errors which beset the dogmatist.  But then, as
Hume seemed to have shown, empiricism must run out into skepticism.  If
all our knowledge has its foundations in experience, how can we expect
to find in our possession any universal or necessary truths?  May not a
later experience contradict an earlier?  How can we be sure that what
has been will be?  Can we _know_ that there is anything fixed and
certain in our world?

Skepticism seemed a forlorn doctrine, and, casting about for a way of
escape from it, Kant hit upon the expedient which I have described.  So
long as we maintain that our knowledge has no other source than the
experiences which the world imprints upon us, so to speak, from
without, we are without the power of prediction, for new experiences
may annihilate any generalizations we have founded upon those already
vouchsafed us; but if we assume that the world upon which we gaze, the
world of phenomena, is made what it is by the mind that perceives it,
are we not in a different position?

Suppose, for example, we take the statement that there must be an
adequate cause of all the changes that take place in the world.  Can a
mere experience of what has been in the past guarantee that this law
will hold good in the future?  But, when we realize that the world of
which we are speaking is nothing more than a world of phenomena, of
experiences, and realize further that this whole world is constructed
by the mind out of the raw materials furnished by the senses, may we
not have a greater confidence in our law?  If it is the nature of the
mind to connect the phenomena presented to it with one another as cause
and effect, may we not maintain that no phenomenon can possibly make
its appearance that defies the law in question?  How could it appear
except under the conditions laid upon all phenomena?  If it is our
nature to think the world as an orderly one, and if we can know no
world save the one we construct ourselves, the orderliness of all the
things we can know seems to be guaranteed to us.

It will be noticed that Kant's doctrine has a negative side.  He limits
our knowledge to phenomena, to experiences, and he is himself, in so
far, an empiricist.  But in that he finds in experience an order, an
arrangement of things, not derived from experience in the usual sense
of the word, he is not an empiricist.  He has paid his own doctrine the
compliment of calling it "criticism," as I have said.

Now, I beg the reader to be here, as elsewhere, on his guard against
the associations which attach to words.  In calling Kant's doctrine
"the critical philosophy," we are in some danger of uncritically
assuming and leading others to believe uncritically that it is free
from such defects as may be expected to attach to "dogmatism" and to
empiricism.  Such a position should not be taken until one has made a
most careful examination of each of the three types of doctrine, of the
assumptions which it makes, and of the rigor with which it draws
inferences upon the basis of such assumptions.  That we may be the
better able to withstand "undue influence," I call attention to the
following points:--

(1) We must bear in mind that the attempt to make a critical
examination into the foundations of our knowledge, and to determine its
scope, is by no means a new thing.  Among the Greeks, Plato, Aristotle,
the Stoics, the Epicureans, and the Skeptics, all attacked the problem.
It did not, of course, present itself to these men in the precise form
in which it presented itself to Kant, but each and all were concerned
to find an answer to the question: Can we know anything with certainty;
and, if so, what?  They may have failed to be thoroughly critical, but
they certainly made the attempt.

I shall omit mention of the long series of others, who, since that
time, have carried on the tradition, and shall speak only of Descartes
and Locke, whom I have above brought forward as representatives of the
two types of doctrine that Kant contrasts with his own.

To see how strenuously Descartes endeavored to subject his knowledge to
a critical scrutiny and to avoid unjustifiable assumptions of any sort,
one has only to read that charming little work of genius, the
"Discourse on the Method of Rightly Conducting the Reason."

In his youth Descartes was, as he informs us, an eager student; but,
when he had finished the whole course of education usually prescribed,
he found himself so full of doubts and errors that he did not feel that
he had advanced in learning at all.  Yet he had been well tutored, and
was considered as bright in mind as others.  He was led to judge his
neighbor by himself, and to conclude that there existed no such certain
science as he had been taught to suppose.

Having ripened with years and experience, Descartes set about the task
of which I have spoken above, the task of sweeping away the whole body
of his opinions and of attempting a general and systematic
reconstruction.  So important a work should be, he thought, approached
with circumspection; hence, he formulated certain Rules of Method.

"The first," he writes, "was never to accept anything for true which I
did not clearly know to be such; that is, carefully to avoid haste and
prejudice, and to include nothing more in my judgments than what was
presented to my mind so clearly and distinctly as to exclude all reason
for doubt."

Such was our philosopher's design, and such the spirit in which he set
about it.  We have seen the result above.  It is as if Descartes had
decided that a certain room full of people did not appear to be free
from suspicious characters, and had cleared out every one, afterwards
posting himself at the door to readmit only those who proved themselves
worthy.  When we examine those who succeeded in passing muster, we
discover he has favored all his old friends.  He simply _cannot_ doubt
them; are they not vouched for by the "natural light"?  Nevertheless,
we must not forget that Descartes sifted his congregation with much
travail of spirit.  He did try to be critical.

As for John Locke, he reveals in the "Epistle to the Reader," which
stands as a preface to the "Essay," the critical spirit in which his
work was taken up.  "Were it fit to trouble thee," he writes, "with the
history of this Essay, I should tell thee, that five or six friends
meeting at my chamber, and discoursing on a subject very remote from
this, found themselves quickly at a stand, by the difficulties that
rose on every side.  After we had a while puzzled ourselves, without
coming any nearer a resolution of those doubts which perplexed us, it
came into my thoughts, that we took a wrong course; and that before we
set ourselves upon inquiries of that nature, it was necessary to
examine our own abilities, and to see what objects our understandings
were, or were not, fitted to deal with."

This problem, proposed by himself to his little circle of friends,
Locke attacked with earnestness, and as a result he brought out many
years later the work which has since become so famous.  The book is
literally a critique of the reason, although a very different critique
from that worked out by Kant.

"If, by this inquiry into the nature of the understanding," says Locke,
"I can discover the powers thereof, how far they reach, to what things
they are in any degree proportionate, and where they fail us; I suppose
it may be of use to prevail with the busy mind of man to be more
cautious in meddling with things exceeding its comprehension; to stop
when it is at the utmost extent of its tether; and to sit down in a
quiet ignorance of those things which upon examination are found to be
beyond the reach of our capacities." [2]

To the difficulties of the task our author is fully alive: "The
understanding, like the eye, whilst it makes us see and perceive all
other things, takes no notice of itself; and it requires art and pains
to set it at a distance, and make it its own object.  But whatever be
the difficulties that lie in the way of this inquiry, whatever it be
that keeps us so much in the dark to ourselves, sure I am that all the
light we can let in upon our own minds, all the acquaintance we can
make with our own understandings, will not only be very pleasant, but
bring us great advantage, in directing our thoughts in the search, of
other things." [3]

(2) Thus, many men have attempted to produce a critical philosophy, and
in much the same sense as that in which Kant uses the words.  Those who
have come after them have decided that they were not sufficiently
critical, that they have made unjustifiable assumptions.  When we come
to read Kant, we will, if we have read the history of philosophy with
profit, not forget to ask ourselves if he has not sinned in the same
way.

For example, we will ask;--

(a) Was Kant right in maintaining that we find in experience synthetic
judgments (section 51) that are not founded upon experience, but yield
such information as is beyond the reach of the empiricist?  There are
those who think that the judgments to which he alludes in evidence of
his contention--the mathematical, for instance--are not of this
character.

(b) Was he justified in assuming that all the ordering of our world is
due to the activity of mind, and that merely the raw material is
"given" us through the senses?  There are many who demur against such a
statement, and hold that it is, if not in all senses untrue, at least
highly misleading, since it seems to argue that there is no really
external world at all.  Moreover, they claim that the doctrine is
neither self-evident nor susceptible of proper proof.

(c) Was Kant justified in assuming that, even if we attribute the
"form" or arrangement of the world we know to the native activity of
the mind, the necessity and universality of our knowledge is assured?
Let us grant that the proposition, whatever happens must have an
adequate cause, is a "form of thought."  What guarantee have we that
the "forms of thought" must ever remain changeless?  If it is an
assumption for the empiricist to declare that what has been true in the
past will be true in the future, that earlier experiences of the world
will not be contradicted by later; what is it for the Kantian to
maintain that the order which he finds in his experience will
necessarily and always be the order of all future experiences?
Transferring an assumption to the field of mind does not make it less
of an assumption.

Thus, it does not seem unreasonable to charge Kant with being a good
deal of a rationalist.  He tried to confine our knowledge to the field
of experience, it is true; but he made a number of assumptions as to
the nature of experience which certainly do not shine by their own
light, and which many thoughtful persons regard as incapable of
justification.

Kant's famous successors in the German philosophy, Fichte (1762-1814),
Schelling (1775-1854), Hegel (1770-1831), and Schopenhauer (1788-1860),
all received their impulse from the "critical philosophy," and yet each
developed his doctrine in a relatively independent way.

I cannot here take the space to characterize the systems of these men;
I may merely remark that all of them contrast strongly in doctrine and
method with the British philosophers mentioned in the last section,
Locke, Berkeley, Hume, and Mill.  They are _un-empirical_, if one may
use such a word; and, to one accustomed to reading the English
philosophy, they seem ever ready to spread their wings and hazard the
boldest of flights without a proper realization of the thinness of the
atmosphere in which they must support themselves.

However, no matter what may be one's opinion of the actual results
attained by these German philosophers, one must frankly admit that no
one who wishes to understand clearly the development of speculative
thought can afford to dispense with a careful reading of them.  Much
even of the English philosophy of our own day must remain obscure to
those who have not looked into their pages.  Thus, the thought of Kant
and Hegel molded the thought of Thomas Hill Green (1836-1882) and of
the brothers Caird; and their influence has made itself widely felt
both in England and in America.  One cannot criticise intelligently
books written from their standpoint, unless one knows how the authors
came by their doctrine and out of what it has been developed.

63. CRITICAL EMPIRICISM.--We have seen that the trouble with the
rationalists seemed to be that they made an appeal to "eternal truths,"
which those who followed them could not admit to be eternal truths at
all.  They proceeded on a basis of assumptions the validity of which
was at once called in question.

Locke, the empiricist, repudiated all this, and then also made
assumptions which others could not, and cannot, approve.  Kant did
something of much the same sort; we cannot regard his "criticism" as
wholly critical.

How can we avoid such errors?  How walk cautiously, and go around the
pit into which, as it seems to us, others have fallen?  I may as well
tell the reader frankly that he sets his hope too high if he expects to
avoid all error and to work out for himself a philosophy in all
respects unassailable.  The difficulties of reflective thought are very
great, and we should carry with us a consciousness of that fact and a
willingness to revise our most cherished conclusions.

Our initial difficulty seems to be that we must begin by assuming
_something_, if only as material upon which to work.  We must begin our
philosophizing _somewhere_.  Where shall we begin?  May we not fall
into error at the very outset?

The doctrine set forth in the earlier chapters of this volume maintains
that we must accept as our material the revelation of the mind and the
world which seems to be made in our common experience, and which is
extended and systematized in the sciences.  But it insists that we must
regard such an acceptance as merely provisional, must subject our
concepts to a careful criticism, and must always be on our guard
against hasty assumptions.

It emphasizes the value of the light which historical study casts upon
the real meaning of the concepts which we all use and must use, but
which have so often proved to be stones of stumbling in the path of
those who have employed them.  Its watchword is analysis, always
analysis; and a settled distrust of what have so often passed as
"self-evident" truths.  It regards it as its task to analyze
experience, while maintaining that only the satisfactory carrying out
of such an analysis can reveal what experience really is, and clear our
notions of it from misinterpretations.

No such attempt to give an account of experience can be regarded as
fundamentally new in its method.  Every philosopher, in his own way,
criticises experience, and seeks its interpretation.  But one may,
warned by the example of one's predecessors, lay emphasis upon the
danger of half-analyses and hasty assumptions, and counsel the
observance of sobriety and caution.

For convenience, I have called the doctrine _Critical Empiricism_.  I
warn the reader against the seductive title, and advise him not to
allow it to influence him unduly in his judgment of the doctrine.

64. PRAGMATISM.--It seems right that I should, before closing this
chapter, say a few words about Pragmatism, which has been so much
discussed in the last few years.

In 1878 Mr. Charles S. Peirce wrote an article for the _Popular Science
Monthly_ in which he proposed as a maxim for the attainment of
clearness of apprehension the following: "Consider what effects, which
might conceivably have practical bearings, we conceive the object of
our conception to have.  Then, our conception of these effects is the
whole of our conception of the object."

This thought has been taken up by others and given a development which
Mr. Peirce regards with some suspicion.  He refers[4] especially to the
development it has received at the hands of Professor William James, in
his two essays, "The Will to Believe" and "Philosophical Conceptions
and Practical Results." [5]  Professor James is often regarded as
foremost among the pragmatists.

I shall not attempt to define pragmatism, for I do not believe that the
doctrine has yet attained to that definiteness of formulation which
warrants a definition.  We seem to have to do not so much with a
clear-cut doctrine, the limits and consequences of which have been
worked out in detail, as with a tendency which makes itself apparent in
the works of various writers under somewhat different forms.

I may roughly describe it as the tendency to take that to be _true_
which is _useful_ or _serviceable_.  It is well illustrated in the two
essays to which reference is made above.

Thus, Professor James dwells upon the unsatisfactoriness and
uncertainty of philosophical and scientific knowledge: "Objective
evidence and certitude are doubtless very fine ideals to play with, but
where on this moonlit and dream-visited planet are they found?"

Now, among those things regarding which it appears impossible to attain
to intellectual certitude, there are matters of great practical moment,
and which affect deeply the conduct of life; for example, the doctrines
of religion.  Here a merely skeptical attitude seems intolerable.

In such cases, argues Professor James, "we have the right to believe at
our own risk any hypothesis that is live enough to tempt our will."

It is important to notice that there is no question here of a logical
right.  We are concerned with matters regarding which, according to
Professor James, we cannot look for intellectual evidence.  It is
assumed that we believe simply because we choose to believe--we believe
arbitrarily.

It is further important to notice that what is a "live" hypothesis to
one man need not tempt the will of another man at all.  As our author
points out, a Turk would naturally will to believe one thing and a
Christian would will to believe another.  Each would will to believe
what struck him as a satisfactory thing to believe.

What shall we say to this doctrine?  I think we must say that it is
clearly not a philosophical _method of attaining to truth_.  Hence, it
has not properly a place in this chapter among the attempts which have
been made to attain to the truth of things.

It is, in fact, not concerned with truths, but with assumptions, and
with assumptions which are supposed to be made on the basis of no
evidence.  It is concerned with "seemings."

The distinction is a very important one.  Our Turk cannot, by willing
to believe it, make his hypothesis true; but he can make it _seem_
true.  Why should he wish to make it seem true whether it is true or
not?  Why should he strive to attain to a feeling of subjective
certainty, not by logically resolving his doubts, but by ignoring them?

The answer is given us by our author.  He who lives in the midst of
doubts, and refuses to cut his knot with the sword of belief, misses
the good of life.  This is a practical problem, and one of no small
moment.  In the last section of this book I have tried to indicate what
it is wise for a man to do when he is confronted by doubts which he
cannot resolve.

Into the general question whether even a false belief may not, under
some circumstances, be more serviceable than no belief at all, I shall
not enter.  The point I wish to emphasize is that there is all the
difference in the world between _producing a belief_ and _proving a
truth_.

We are compelled to accept it as a fact that men, under the influence
of feeling, can believe in the absence of evidence, or, for that
matter, can believe in spite of evidence.  But a truth cannot be
established in the absence of evidence or in the face of adverse
evidence.  And there is a very wide field in which it is made very
clear to us that beliefs adopted in the absence of evidence are in
danger of being false beliefs.

The pragmatist would join with the rest of us in condemning the Turk or
the Christian who would simply will to believe in the rise or the fall
of stocks, and would refuse to consult the state of the market.  Some
hypotheses are, in the ordinary course of events, put to the test of
verification.  We are then made painfully aware that beliefs and truths
are quite distinct things, and may not be in harmony.

Now, the pragmatist does not apply his principle to this field.  He
confines it to what may not inaptly be called the field of the
unverifiable.  The Turk, who wills to believe in the hypothesis that
appeals to him as a pious Turk, is in no such danger of a rude
awakening as is the man who wills to believe that stocks will go up or
down.  But mark what this means: it means that _he is not in danger of
finding out what the truth really is_.  It does not mean that he is in
possession of the truth.

So I say, the doctrine which we are discussing is not a method of
attaining to truth.  What it really attempts to do is to point out to
us how it is prudent for us to act when we cannot discover what the
truth is.[6]


[1] "An Essay concerning Human Understanding," Book II, Chapter I,
section 2.

[2] Book I, Chapter I, section 4.

[3] Book I, Chapter I, section 1.

[4] "Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology," article "Pragmatism."

[5] Published in 1897 and 1898.

[6] For references to later developments of pragmatism, see the note on
page 312.




V. THE PHILOSOPHICAL SCIENCES


CHAPTER XVI

LOGIC

65. INTRODUCTORY: THE PHILOSOPHICAL SCIENCES.--I have said in the first
chapter of this book (section 6) that there is quite a group of
sciences that are regarded as belonging peculiarly to the province of
the teacher of philosophy to-day.  Having, in the chapters preceding,
given some account of the nature of reflective thought, of the problems
touching the world and the mind which present themselves to those who
reflect, and of some types of philosophical theory which have their
origin in such reflection, I turn to a brief consideration of the
philosophical sciences.

Among these I included logic, psychology, ethics, and aesthetics,
metaphysics, and the history of philosophy.  I did not include
epistemology or "the theory of knowledge" as a separate discipline, and
my reasons for this will appear in Chapter XIX.  I remarked that, to
complete the list, we should have to add the philosophy of religion and
an investigation into the principles and methods of the sciences
generally.

Why, it was asked, should this group of disciplines be regarded as the
field of the philosopher, when others are excluded?  The answer to this
question which finds the explanation of the fact to lie in a mere
historical accident was declared unsatisfactory, and it was maintained
that the philosophical sciences are those in which we find ourselves
carried back to the problems of reflective thought.

With a view to showing the truth of this opinion, I shall take up one
by one the philosophical sciences.  Of the history of philosophy I
shall not speak in this part of the work, but shall treat of it in
Chapter XXIII.

66. THE TRADITIONAL LOGIC.--Most of us begin our acquaintance with
logic in the study of some such elementary manual as Jevons' "Lessons
in Logic."

In such books we are shown how terms represent things and classes of
things or their attributes, and how we unite them into propositions or
statements.  It is indicated at length what statements may be made on a
basis of certain other statements and what may not; and emphasis is
laid upon the dangers which arise out of a misunderstanding of the
language in which we are forced to express our thoughts.  Finally,
there are described for us the experimental methods by which the
workers in the sciences have attained to the general information about
the world which has become our heritage.

Such books are useful.  It is surely no small profit for a student to
gain the habit of scrutinizing the steps by which he has come into the
possession of a certain bit of information, and to have a quick eye for
loose and inconsistent reasonings.

But it is worthy of remark that one may study such a book as this and
yet remain pretty consistently on what may be called the plane of the
common understanding.  One seems to make the assumptions made in all
the special sciences, _e.g._ the assumption that there is a world of
real things and that we can know them and reason about them.  We are
not introduced to such problems as: What _is_ truth?  and Is _any_
knowledge valid?  Nor does it seem at once apparent that the man who is
studying logic in this way is busying himself with a philosophical
discipline.

67. THE "MODERN LOGIC."--It is very puzzling for the student to turn
from such a text-book as the one above mentioned to certain others
which profess to be occupied with the same science, and which, yet,
appear to treat of quite different things.

Thus, in Dr. Bosanquet's little work on "The Essentials of Logic," the
reader is at once plunged into such questions as the nature of
knowledge, and what is meant by the real world.  We seem to be dealing
with metaphysics, and not with logic, as we have learned to understand
the term.  How is it that the logician comes to regard these things as
within his province?

A multitude of writers at the present day are treating logic in this
way, and in some great prominence is given to problems which the
philosopher recognizes as indisputably his own.  The term "modern
logic" is often employed to denote a logic of this type; one which does
not, after the fashion of the natural sciences generally, proceed on
the basis of certain assumptions, and leave deeper questions to some
other discipline, but tries to get to the bottom of things for itself.
The tendency to run into metaphysics is peculiarly marked in those
writers who have been influenced by the work of the philosopher Hegel.

I shall not here ask why those who belong to one school are more
inclined to be metaphysical than are those who belong to another, but
shall approach the broader question why the logicians generally are
inclined to be more metaphysical than those who work in certain other
special sciences, such as mathematics, for example.  Of the general
tendency there can be no question.  The only problem is: Why does this
tendency exist?

68. LOGIC AND PHILOSOPHY.--Let us contrast the science of arithmetic
with logic; and let us notice, regarding it, the following points:--

It is, like logic, a _general_ science, in that the things treated of
in many sciences may be numbered.  It considers only a certain aspect
of the things.

Now, that things may be counted, added together, subtracted, etc., is
guaranteed by the experience of the plain man; and the methods of
determining the numerical relations of things are gradually developed
before his eyes, beginning with operations of great simplicity.
Moreover, verification is possible, and within certain limits
verification by direct inspection.

To this we may add, that there has gradually been built up a fine
system of unambiguous symbols, and it is possible for a man to know
just what he is dealing with.

Thus, a certain beaten path has been attained, and a man may travel
this very well without having forced on his attention the problems of
reflective thought.  The knowledge of numbers with which he starts is
sufficient equipment with which to undertake the journey.  That one is
on the right road is proved by the results one obtains.  As a rule,
disputes can be settled by well-tried mathematical methods.

There is, then, a common agreement as to initial assumptions and
methods of work, and useful results are attained which seem to justify
both.  Here we have the normal characteristics of a special science.

We must not forget, however, that, even in the mathematical sciences,
before a beaten path was attained, disputes as to the significance of
numbers and the cogency of proofs were sufficiently common.  And we
must bear in mind that even to-day, where the beaten path does not seem
wholly satisfactory, men seem to be driven to reflect upon the
significance of their assumptions and the nature of their method.

Thus, we find it not unnatural that a man should be led to ask; What is
a minus quantity really?  Can anything be less than nothing? or that he
should raise the questions: Can one rightly speak of an infinite
number?  Can one infinite number be greater than another, and, if so,
what can greater mean?  What are infinitesimals? and what can be meant
by different orders of infinitesimals?

He who has interested himself in such questions as these has betaken
himself to philosophical reflection.  They are not answered by
employing mathematical methods.

Let us now turn to logic.  And let us notice, to begin with, that it is
broader in its application than the mathematical sciences.  It is
concerned to discover what constitutes _evidence_ in every field of
investigation.

There is, it is true, a part of logic that may be developed somewhat
after the fashion of mathematics.  Thus, we may examine the two
statements: All men are mortal, and Caesar is a man; and we may see
clearly that, given the truth of these, we must admit that Caesar is
mortal.  We may make a list of possible inferences of this kind, and
point out under what circumstances the truth of two statements implies
the truth of a third, and under what circumstances the inference cannot
be made.  Our results can be set forth in a system of symbols.  As in
mathematics, we may abstract from the particular things reasoned about,
and concern ourselves only with the forms of reasoning.  This gives us
the theory of the _syllogism_; it is a part of logic in which the
mathematician is apt to feel very much at home.

But this is by no means all of logic.  Let us consider the following
points:--

(1) We are not concerned to know only what statements may be made on
the basis of certain other statements.  We want to know what is true
and what is false.  We must ask: Has a man the right to set up these
particular statements and to reason from them?  That some men accept as
true premises which are repudiated by others is an undoubted fact.
Thus, it is maintained by certain philosophers that we may assume that
any view of the universe which is repellant to our nature cannot be
true.  Shall we allow this to pass unchallenged?  And in ethics, some
have held that it is under all circumstances wrong to lie; others have
denied this, and have held that in certain cases--for example, to save
life or to prevent great and unmerited suffering--lying is permissible.
Shall we interest ourselves only in the deductions that each man makes
from his assumed premises, and pay no attention to the truth of the
premises themselves?

(2) Again.  The vast mass of the reasonings that interest men are
expressed in the language that we all use and not in special symbols.
But language is a very imperfect instrument, and all sorts of
misunderstandings are possible to those who express their thoughts in
it.

Few men know exactly how much is implied in what they are saying.  If I
say: All men are mortal, and an angel is not a man; therefore, an angel
is not mortal; it is not at once apparent to every one in what respect
my argument is defective.  He who argues: Feathers are light; light is
contrary to darkness; hence, feathers are contrary to darkness; is
convicted of error without difficulty.  But arguments of the same kind,
and quite as bad, are to be found in learned works on matters less
familiar to us, and we often fail to detect the fallacy.

Thus, Herbert Spencer argues, in effect, in the fourth and fifth
chapters of his "First Principles," as follows:--

  We are conscious of the Unknowable,
  The Unknowable lies behind the veil of phenomena,
  Hence, we are conscious of what lies behind the veil of phenomena.

It is only the critical reader who notices that the Unknowable in the
first line is the "raw material of consciousness," and the Unknowable
in the second is something not in consciousness at all.  The two senses
of the word "light" are not more different from one another.  Such
apparent arguments abound, and it often requires much acuteness to be
able to detect their fallacious character.

When we take into consideration the two points indicated above, we see
that the logician is at every turn forced to reflect upon our knowledge
as men do not ordinarily reflect.  He is led to ask: What is truth?  He
cannot accept uncritically the assumptions which men make; and he must
endeavor to become very clearly conscious of the real meaning and the
whole meaning of statements expressed in words.  Even in the simple
logic with which we usually begin our studies, we learn to scrutinize
statements in a reflective way; and when we go deeper, we are at once
in contact with philosophical problems.  It is evidently our task to
attain to a clearer insight into the nature of our experience and the
meaning of proof than is attainable by the unreflective.

Logic, then, is a reflective science, and it is not surprising that it
has held its place as one of the philosophical sciences.




CHAPTER XVII

PSYCHOLOGY

69. PSYCHOLOGY AND PHILOSOPHY.--I think I have said enough in Chapter
II (section 10) about what we mean when we speak of psychology as a
natural science and as an independent discipline.  Certainly there are
many psychologists who would not care to be confused with the
philosophers, and there are some that regard philosophy with suspicion.

Nevertheless, psychology is commonly regarded as belonging to the
philosophical group.  That this is the case can scarcely be thought
surprising when we see how the psychologist himself speaks of the
relation of his science to philosophy.

"I have kept," writes Professor James[1] in that delightful book which
has become the common property of us all, "close to the point of view
of natural science throughout the book.  Every natural science assumes
certain data uncritically, and declines to challenge the elements
between which its own 'laws' obtain, and from which its own deductions
are carried on.  Psychology, the science of finite individual minds,
assumes as its data (1) _thoughts and feelings_, and (2) _a physical
world_ in time and space with which they coexist, and which (3) _they
know_.  Of course, these data themselves are discussable; but the
discussion of them (as of other elements) is called metaphysics and
falls outside the province of this book."

This is an admirable statement of the scope of psychology as a natural
science, and also of the relations of metaphysics to the sciences.  But
it would not be fair to Professor James to take this sentence alone,
and to assume that, in his opinion, it is easy to separate psychology
altogether from philosophy.  "The reader," he tells us in the next
paragraph, "will in vain seek for any closed system in the book.  It is
mainly a mass of descriptive details, running out into queries which
only a metaphysics alive to the weight of her task can hope
successfully to deal with."  And in the opening sentence of the preface
he informs us that some of his chapters are more "metaphysical" than is
suitable for students going over the subject for the first time.

That the author is right in maintaining that it is not easy to draw a
clear line between philosophy and psychology, and to declare the latter
wholly independent, I think we must concede.  An independent science
should be sure of the things with which it is dealing.  Where these are
vague and indefinite, and are the subject of constant dispute, it
cannot march forward with assurance.  One is rather forced to go back
and examine the data themselves.  The beaten track of the special
science has not been satisfactorily constructed.

We are forced to admit that the science of psychology has not yet
emerged from the state in which a critical examination of its
foundations is necessary, and that the construction of the beaten path
is still in progress.  This I shall try to make clear by illustrations.

The psychologist studies the mind, and his ultimate appeal must be to
introspection, to a direct observation of mental phenomena, and of
their relations to external things.  Now, if the observation of mental
phenomena were a simple and an easy thing; if the mere fact that we are
conscious of sensations and ideas implied that we are _clearly_
conscious of them and are in a position to describe them with accuracy,
psychology would be a much more satisfactory science than it is.

But we are not thus conscious of our mental life.  We can and do use
our mental states without being able to describe them accurately.  In a
sense, we are conscious of what is there, but our consciousness is
rather dim and vague, and in our attempts to give an account of it we
are in no little danger of giving a false account.

Thus, the psychologist assumes that we perceive both physical phenomena
and mental--the external world and the mind.  He takes it for granted
that we perceive mental phenomena to be related to physical.  He is
hardly in a position to make this assumption, and then to set it aside
as a thing he need not further consider.  Does he not tell us, as a
result of his investigations, that we can know the external world only
as it is reflected in our sensations, and thus seem to shut the mind up
within the circle of mental phenomena merely, cutting off absolutely a
direct knowledge of what is extra-mental?  If we can know only mental
phenomena, the representatives of things, at first hand, how can we
tell that they are representatives? and what becomes of the assumption
that we _perceive_ that mind is related to an external world?

It may be said, this problem the psychologist may leave to the
metaphysician.  Certainly, it is one of those problems that the
metaphysician discusses; it has been treated in Chapter IV.  But my
contention is, that he who has given no thought to the matter may
easily fall into error as to the very nature of mental phenomena.

For example, when we approach or recede from a physical object we have
a series of experiences which are recognized as sensational.  When we
imagine a tree or a house we are also experiencing a mental phenomenon.
All these experiences _seem_ plainly to have extension in some sense of
the word.  We appear to perceive plainly part out of part.  In so far,
these mental things seem to resemble the physical things which we
contrast with what is mental.  Shall we say that, because these things
are mental and not physical, their apparent extension is a delusion?
Shall we say that they really have no parts?  Such considerations have
impelled psychologists of eminence to maintain, in flat contradiction
to what seems to be the unequivocal testimony of direct introspection,
that the total content of consciousness at any moment must be looked
upon as an indivisible, part-less unit.

We cannot, then, depend merely on direct introspection.  It is too
uncertain in its deliverances.  If we would make clear to ourselves
what mental phenomena really are, and how they | differ from physical
phenomena, we must fall back upon the reflective analysis of our
experience which occupies the metaphysician (section 34).  Until we
have done this, we are in great danger of error.  We are actually
uncertain of our materials.

Again.  The psychologist speaks of the relation of mind and body.  Some
psychologists incline to be parallelists, some are warm advocates of
interactionism.  Now, any theory of the relation of mind to body must
depend on observation ultimately.  If we had not direct experience of a
relation between the physical and the mental somewhere, no hypothesis
on the subject would ever have emerged.

But our experiences are not perfectly clear and unequivocal to us.
Their significance does not seem to be easily grasped.  To comprehend
it one is forced to that reflective examination of experience which is
characteristic of the philosopher (Chapter IX).

Here it may again be said: Leave the matter to the meta-physician and
go on with your psychological work.  I answer: The psychologist is not
in the same position as the botanist or the zoölogist.  He is studying
mind in its relation to body.  It cannot but be unsatisfactory to him
to leave that relation wholly vague; and, as a matter of fact, he
usually takes up with one theory or another.  We have seen (section 36)
that he may easily adopt a theory that leads him to overlook the great
difference between physical phenomena and mental phenomena, and to
treat them as though they were the same.  This one may do in spite of
all that introspection has to say about the gulf that separates them.

Psychology is, then, very properly classed among the philosophical
sciences.  The psychologist is not sufficiently sure of his materials
to be able to dispense with reflective thought, in many parts of his
field.  Some day there may come to be a consensus of opinion touching
fundamental facts, and the science may become more independent.  A
beaten track may be attained; but that has not yet been done.

70. THE DOUBLE AFFILIATION OF PSYCHOLOGY.--In spite of what has been
said above, we must not forget that psychology is a _relatively_
independent science.  One may be a useful psychologist without knowing
much about philosophy.

As in logic it is possible to write a text-book not greatly different
in spirit and method from text-books concerned with the sciences not
classed as philosophical, so it is possible to make a useful study of
mental phenomena without entering upon metaphysical analyses.  In
science, as in common life, we can _use_ concepts without subjecting
them to careful analysis.

Thus, our common experience reveals that mind and body are connected.
We may, for a specific purpose, leave the _nature_ of this connection
vague, and may pay careful attention to the physiological conditions of
mental phenomena, studying in detail the senses and the nervous system.
We may, further, endeavor to render our knowledge of mental phenomena
more full and accurate by experimentation.  In doing this we may be
compelled to make use of elaborate apparatus.  Of such mechanical aids
to investigation our psychological laboratories are full.

It is to such work as this that we owe what is called the
"physiological" and the "experimental" psychology.  One can carry on
such investigations without being a metaphysician.  But one can
scarcely carry them on without having a good knowledge of certain
sciences not commonly supposed to be closely related to psychology at
all.  Thus, one should be trained in chemistry and physics and
physiology, and should have a working knowledge of laboratory methods.
Moreover, it is desirable to have a sufficient knowledge of mathematics
to enable one to handle experimental data.

The consideration of such facts as these sometimes leads men to raise
the question: Should psychology affiliate with philosophy or with the
physical sciences?  The issue is an illegitimate one.  Psychology is
one of the philosophical sciences, and cannot dispense with reflection;
but that is no reason why it should not acknowledge a close relation to
certain physical sciences as well.  Parts of the field can be isolated,
and one may work as one works in the natural sciences generally; but if
one does nothing more, one's concepts remain unanalyzed, and, as we
have seen in the previous section, there is some danger of actual
misconception.


[1] "Psychology," Preface.




CHAPTER XVIII

ETHICS AND AESTHETICS

71. COMMON SENSE ETHICS.--We may, if we choose, study the actions of
men merely with a view to ascertaining what they are and describing
them accurately.  Something like this is done by the anthropologist,
who gives us an account of the manners and customs of the various races
of mankind; he tells us _what is_; he may not regard it as within his
province at all to inform us regarding _what ought to be_.

But men do not merely act; they judge their actions in the light of
some norm or standard, and they distinguish between them as right and
wrong.  The systematic study of actions as right and wrong yields us
the science of ethics.

Like psychology, ethics is a special science.  It is concerned with a
somewhat limited field of investigation, and is not to be confounded
with other sciences.  It has a definite aim distinct from theirs.  And,
also like psychology, ethics is classed as one of the philosophical
sciences, and its relation to philosophy is supposed to be closer than
that of such sciences as physics and mathematics.  It is fair to ask
why this is so.  Why cannot ethics proceed on the basis of certain
assumptions independently, and leave to some other discipline the whole
question of an inquiry into the nature and validity of those
assumptions?

About half a century ago Dr. William Whewell, one of the most learned
of English scholars, wrote a work entitled "The Elements of Morality,"
in which he attempted to treat the science of ethics as it is generally
admitted that one may treat the science of geometry.  The book was
rather widely read a generation since, but we meet with few references
to it in our time.

"Morality and the philosophy of morality," argues the author, "differ
in the same manner and in the same degree as geometry and the
philosophy of geometry.  Of these two subjects, geometry consists of a
series of positive and definite propositions, deduced one from another,
in succession, by rigorous reasoning, and all resting upon certain
definitions and self-evident axioms.  The philosophy of geometry is
quite a different subject; it includes such inquiries as these: Whence
is the cogency of geometrical proof?  What is the evidence of the
axioms and definitions?  What are the faculties by which we become
aware of their truth? and the like.  The two kinds of speculation have
been pursued, for the most part, by two different classes of
persons,--the geometers and the metaphysicians; for it has been far
more the occupation of metaphysicians than of geometers to discuss such
questions as I have stated, the nature of geometrical proofs,
geometrical axioms, the geometrical faculty, and the like.  And if we
construct a complete system of geometry, it will be almost exactly the
same, whatever be the views which we take on these metaphysical
questions." [1]

Such a system Dr. Whewell wishes to construct in the field of ethics.
His aim is to give us a view of morality in which moral propositions
are "deduced from axioms, by successive steps of reasoning, so far as
to form a connected system of moral truth."  Such a "sure and connected
knowledge of the duties of man" would, he thinks, be of the greatest
importance.

In accordance with this purpose, Dr. Whewell assumes that humanity,
justice, truth, purity, order, earnestness, and moral purpose are
fundamental principles of human action; and he thinks that all who
admit as much as this will be able to go on with him in his development
of a system of moral rules to govern the life of man.

It would hardly be worth while for me to speak at length of a way of
treating ethics so little likely to be urged upon the attention of the
reader who busies himself with the books which are appearing in our own
day, were it not that we have here an admirable illustration of the
attempt to teach ethics as though it were such a science as geometry.
The shortcomings of the method become very evident to one who reads the
work attentively.

Thus, we are forced to ask ourselves, have we really a collection of
ultimate moral principles which are analogous to the axioms of
geometry?  For example, to take but a single instance, Dr. Whewell
formulates the Principle of Truth as follows: "We must conform to the
universal understanding among men which the use of language
implies";[2] and he remarks later; "The rules: _Lie not_, Perform your
promise, are of universal validity; and the conceptions of _lie_ and of
_promise_ are so simple and distinct that, in general, the rules may be
directly and easily applied." [3]

Now, we are struck by the fact that this affirmation of the universal
validity of the principle of truth is made in a chapter on "Cases of
Conscience," in a chapter concerned with what seem to be conflicts
between duties; and this chapter is followed by one which treats of
"Cases of Necessity," _i.e._ cases in which a man is to be regarded as
justified in violating common rules when there seems to be urgent
reason for so doing.  We are told that the moralist cannot say: Lie
not, except in great emergencies; but must say: Lie not at all.  But we
are also told that he must grant that there are cases of necessity in
which transgressions of moral rules are excusable; and this looks very
much as if he said: Go on and do the thing while I close my eyes.

This hardly seems to give us a "sure and connected knowledge of the
duties of man" deduced from axiomatic principles.  On what authority
shall we suspend for the time being this axiomatic principle or that?
Is there some deeper principle which lends to each of them its
authority, and which may, for cause, withdraw it?  There is no hint of
such in the treatment of ethics which we are considering, and we seem
to have on our hands, not so much a science, as a collection of
practical rules, of the scope of which we are more or less in the dark.

The interesting thing to notice is that this view of ethics is very
closely akin to that adapted unconsciously by the majority of the
persons we meet who have not interested themselves much in ethics as a
science.

By the time that we have reached years of discretion we are all in
possession of a considerable number of moral maxims.  We consider it
wrong to steal, to lie, to injure our neighbor.  Such maxims lie in our
minds side by side, and we do not commonly think of criticising them.
But now and then we face a situation in which one maxim seems to urge
one course of action and another maxim a contrary one.  Shall we tell
the truth and the whole truth, when so doing will bring grave
misfortune upon an innocent person?  And now and then we are brought to
the realization that all men do not admit the validity of all our
maxims.  Judgments differ as to what is right and what is wrong.  Who
shall be the arbiter?  Not infrequently a rough decision is arrived at
in the assumption that we have only to interrogate "conscience"--in the
assumption, in other words, that we carry a watch which can be counted
upon to give the correct time, even if the timepieces of our neighbors
are not to be depended upon.

The common sense ethics cannot be regarded as very systematic and
consistent, or as very profound.  It is a collection of working rules,
of practical maxims; and, although it is impossible to overestimate its
value as a guide to life, its deficiencies, when it is looked at
critically, become evident, I think, even to thoughtful persons who are
not scientific at all.

Many writers on ethics have simply tried to turn this collection of
working rules into a science, somewhat as Dr. Whewell has done.  This
is the peculiar weakness of those who have been called the
"intuitionalists"--though I must warn the reader against assuming that
this term has but the one meaning, and that all those to whom it has
been applied should be placed in the same class.  Here it is used to
indicate those who maintain that we are directly aware of the validity
of certain moral principles, must accept them as ultimate, and need
only concern ourselves with the problem of their application.

72. ETHICS AND PHILOSOPHY.--When John Locke maintained that there are
no "innate practical principles," or innate moral maxims, he pointed in
evidence to the "enormities practiced without remorse" in different
ages and by different peoples.  The list he draws up is a curious and
an interesting one.[4]

In our day it has pretty generally come to be recognized by thoughtful
men that a man's judgments as to right and wrong reflect the phase of
civilization, or the lack of it, which he represents, and that their
significance cannot be understood when we consider them apart from
their historic setting.  This means that no man's conscience is set up
as an ultimate standard, but that every man's conscience is regarded as
furnishing material which the science of ethics must take into account.

May we, broadening the basis upon which we are to build, and studying
the manners, customs, and moral judgments of all sorts and conditions
of men, develop an empirical science of ethics which will be
independent of philosophy?

It does not seem that we can do this.  We are concerned with
psychological phenomena, and their nature and significance are by no
means beyond dispute.  For example, there is the feeling of moral
obligation, of which ethics has so much to say.  What is this feeling,
and what is its authority?  Is it a thing to be explained?  Can it
impel a man, let us say, a bigot, to do wrong?  And what can we mean by
credit and discredit, by responsibility and free choice, and other
concepts of the sort?  All this must remain very vague to one who has
not submitted his ethical concepts to reflective analysis of the sort
that we have a right to call philosophical.

Furthermore, it does not seem possible to decide what a man should or
should not do, without taking into consideration the circumstances in
which he is placed.  The same act may be regarded as benevolent or the
reverse according to its context.  If we will but grant the validity of
the premises from which the medieval churchman reasoned, we may well
ask whether, in laying hands violently upon those who dared to form
independent judgments in matters of religion, he was not
conscientiously doing his best for his fellow-man.  He tried by all
means to save some, and to what he regarded as a most dangerous malady
he applied a drastic remedy.  By what standard shall we judge him?

There can be no doubt that our doctrine of the whole duty of man must
be conditioned by our view of the nature of the world in which man
lives and of man's place in the world.  Has ethics nothing to do with
religion?  If we do not believe in God, and if we think that man's life
ends with the death of the body, it is quite possible that we shall set
for him an ethical standard which we should have to modify if we
adopted other beliefs.  The relation of ethics to religion is a problem
that the student of ethics can scarcely set aside.  It seems, then,
that the study of ethics necessarily carries us back to world problems
which cannot be approached except by the path of philosophical
reflection.  We shall see in Chapter XX that the theistic problem
certainly belongs to this class.

It is worthy of our consideration that the vast majority of writers on
ethics have felt strongly that their science runs out into metaphysics.
We can scarcely afford to treat their testimony lightly.  Certainly it
is not possible for one who has no knowledge of philosophy to
understand the significance of the ethical systems which have appeared
in the past.  The history of ethics may be looked upon as a part of the
history of philosophy.  Only on the basis of some general view as to
nature and man have men decided what man ought to do.  As we have seen
above, this appears sufficiently reasonable.

73. AESTHETICS.--Of aesthetics, or the science of the beautiful, I
shall say little.  There is somewhat the same reason for including it
among the philosophical sciences that there is for including ethics.

Those who have paid little attention to science or to philosophy are
apt to dogmatize about what is and what is not beautiful just as they
dogmatize about what is and what is not right.  They say
unhesitatingly; This object is beautiful, and that one is ugly.  It is
as if they said: This one is round, and that one square.

Often it quite escapes their attention that what they now regard as
beautiful struck them as unattractive a short time before; and will,
perhaps, when the ceaseless change of the fashions has driven it out of
vogue, seem strange and unattractive once more.  Nor do they reflect
upon the fact that others, who seem to have as good a right to an
opinion as they, do not agree with them in their judgments; nor upon
the further fact that the standard of beauty is a thing that has varied
from age to age, differs widely in different countries, and presents
minor variations in different classes even in the same community.

The dogmatic utterances of those who are keenly susceptible to the
aesthetic aspects of things but are not given to reflection stand in
striking contrast to the epitome of the popular wisdom expressed in the
skeptical adage that there is no disputing about tastes.

We cannot interpret this adage broadly and take it literally, for then
we should have to admit that men's judgments as to the beautiful cannot
constitute the material of a science at all, and that there can be no
such thing as progress in the fine arts.  The notion of progress
implies a standard, and an approximation to an ideal.  Few would dare
to deny that there has been progress in such arts as painting and
music; and when one has admitted so much as this, one has virtually
admitted that a science of aesthetics is, at least, possible.

The science studies the facts of the aesthetic life as ethics studies
the facts of the moral life.  It can take no man's taste as furnishing
a standard: it must take every man's taste as a fact of significance.
It is driven to reflective analysis--to such questions as, what is
beauty? and what is meant by aesthetic progress?  It deals with elusive
psychological facts the significance of which is not easily grasped.
It is a philosophical science, and is by no means in a position to
follow a beaten path, dispensing with a reflective analysis of its
materials.


[1] Preface.

[2] section 269.

[3] section 376.

[4] "Essay concerning Human Understanding," Book I, Chapter III.




CHAPTER XIX

METAPHYSICS

74. WHAT IS METAPHYSICS?--The reader has probably already remarked that
in some of the preceding chapters the adjectives "metaphysical" and
"philosophical" have been used as if they were interchangeable, in
certain connections, at least.  This is justified by common usage; and
in the present chapter I shall be expected by no one, I think, to prove
that metaphysics is a philosophical discipline.  My task will rather be
to show how far the words "metaphysics" and "philosophy" have a
different meaning.

In Chapters III to XI, I have given a general view of the problems
which present themselves to reflective thought, and I have indicated
that they are not problems which can conveniently be distributed among
the several special sciences.  Is there an external world?  What is it?
What are space and time?  What is the mind?  How are mind and body
related?  How do we know that there are other minds than ours? etc.
These have been presented as _philosophical_ problems; and when we turn
back to the history of speculative thought we find that they are just
the problems with which the men whom we agree to call philosophers have
chiefly occupied themselves.

But when we turn to our treatises on _metaphysics_, we also find that
these are the problems there discussed.  Such treatises differ much
among themselves, and the problems are not presented in the same form
or in the same order; but one who can look beneath the surface will
find that the authors are busied with much the same thing--with some or
all of the problems above mentioned.

How, then, does metaphysics differ from philosophy?  The difference
becomes clear to us when we realize that the word philosophy has a
broader and looser signification, and that metaphysics is, so to speak,
the core, the citadel, of philosophy.

We have seen (Chapter II) that the world and the mind, as they seem to
be presented in the experience of the plain man, do not stand forth
with such clearness and distinctness that he is able to answer
intelligently the questions we wish to ask him regarding their nature.
It is not merely that his information is limited; it is vague and
indefinite as well.  And we have seen, too, that, however the special
sciences may increase and systematize his information, they do not
clear away such vagueness.  The man still uses such concepts as "inner"
and "outer," "reality," "the mind," "space," and "time," with no very
definite notion of what they mean.

Now, the attempt to clear away this vagueness by the systematic
analysis of such concepts--in other words, the attempt to make a
thorough analysis of our experience--is metaphysics.  The metaphysician
strives to limit his task as well as he may, and to avoid unnecessary
excursions into the fields occupied by the special sciences, even those
which lie nearest to his own, such as psychology and ethics.  There is
a sense in which he may be said to be working in the field of a special
science, though he is using as the material for his investigations
concepts which are employed in many sciences; but it is clear that his
discipline is not a special science in the same sense in which geometry
and physics are special sciences.

Nevertheless, the special sciences stand, as we have already seen in
the case of several of them, very near to his own.  If he broadens his
view, and deliberately determines to take a survey of the field of
human knowledge as illuminated by the analyses that he has made, he
becomes something more than a _metaphysician_; he becomes a
_philosopher_.

This does not in the least mean that he becomes a storehouse of
miscellaneous information, and an authority on all the sciences.
Sometimes the philosophers have attempted to describe the world of
matter and of mind as though they possessed some mysterious power of
knowing things that absolved them from the duty of traveling the weary
road of observation and experiment that has ended in the sciences as we
have them.  When they have done this, they have mistaken the
significance of their calling.  A philosopher has no more right than
another man to create information out of nothing.

But it is possible, even for one who is not acquainted with the whole
body of facts presented in a science, to take careful note of the
assumptions upon which that science rests, to analyze the concepts of
which it makes use, to mark the methods which it employs, and to gain a
fair idea of its scope and of its relation to other sciences.  Such a
reflection upon our scientific knowledge is philosophical reflection,
and it may result in a classification of the sciences, and in a general
view of human knowledge as a whole.  Such a view may be illuminating in
the extreme; it can only be harmful when its significance is
misunderstood.

But, it may be argued, why may not the man of science do all this for
himself?  Why should he leave it to the philosopher, who is presumably
less intimately acquainted with the sciences than he is?

To this I answer: The work should, of course, be done by the man who
will do it best.  All our subdivision of labor should be dictated by
convenience.  But I add, that experience has shown that the workers in
the special sciences have not as a rule been very successful when they
have tried to philosophize.

Science is an imperious mistress; she demands one's utmost efforts; and
when a man turns to philosophical reflection merely "by the way," and
in the scraps of time at his disposal after the day's work is done, his
philosophical work is apt to be rather superficial.  Moreover, it does
not follow that, because a man is a good mathematician or chemist or
physicist, he is gifted with the power of reflective analysis.  Then,
too, such men are apt to be imperfectly acquainted with what has been
done in the past; and those who are familiar with the history of
philosophy often have occasion to remark that what is laid before them,
in ignorance of the fact that it is neither new nor original, is a
doctrine which has already made its appearance in many forms and has
been discussed at prodigious length in the centuries gone by.

In certain sciences it seems possible to ignore the past, to a great
extent, at least.  What is worth keeping has been kept, and there is a
solid foundation on which to build for the future.  But with reflective
thought it is not so.  There is no accepted body of doctrine which we
have the right to regard as unassailable.  We should take it as a safe
maxim that the reflections of men long dead _may_ be profounder and
more worthy of our study than those urged upon our attention by the men
of our day.

And this leads me to make a remark upon the titles given to works on
metaphysics.  It seems somewhat misleading to label them: "Outlines of
Metaphysics" or "Elements of Metaphysics."  Such titles suggest that we
are dealing with a body of doctrine which has met with general
acceptance, and may be compared with that found in handbooks on the
special sciences.  But we should realize that, when we are concerned
with the profounder investigations into the nature of our experience,
we tread upon uncertain ground and many differences of opinion obtain.
We should, if possible, avoid a false semblance of authority.

75. EPISTEMOLOGY.--We hear a great deal at the present day of
Epistemology, or the Theory of Knowledge.  I have not classed it as a
distinct philosophical science, for reasons which will appear below.

We have seen in Chapter XVI that it is possible to treat of logic in a
simple way without growing very metaphysical; but we have also seen
that when we go deeply into questions touching the nature of evidence
and what is meant by truth and falsity, we are carried back to
philosophical reflection at once.

We may, for convenience, group together these deeper questions
regarding the nature of knowledge and its scope, and call the subject
of our study "Epistemology."

But it should be remarked, in the first place, that, when we work in
this field, we are exercising a reflective analysis of precisely the
type employed in making the metaphysical analyses contained in the
earlier chapters of this book.  We are treating our experience as it is
not treated in common thought and in science.

And it should be remarked, in the second place, that the investigation
of our knowledge inevitably runs together with an investigation into
the nature of things known, of the mind and the world.  Suppose that I
give the titles of the chapters in Part III of Mr. Hobhouse's able work
on "The Theory of Knowledge."  They are as follows: Validity; the
Validity of Knowledge; the Conception of External Reality; Substance;
the Conception of Self; Reality as a System; Knowledge and Reality; the
Grounds of Knowledge and Belief.

Are not these topics metaphysical?  Let us ask ourselves how it would
affect our views of the validity and of the limits of our knowledge, if
we were converted to the metaphysical doctrines of John Locke, or of
Bishop Berkeley, or of David Hume, or of Thomas Reid, or of Immanuel
Kant.

We may, then, regard epistemology as a part of logic--the metaphysical
part--or as a part of metaphysics; it does not much matter which we
call it, since we mean the same thing.  But its relation to metaphysics
is such that it does not seem worth while to call it a separate
discipline.

Before leaving this subject there is one more point upon which I should
touch, if only to obviate a possible misunderstanding.

We find in Professor Cornelius's clear little book, "An Introduction to
Philosophy" (Leipzig, 1903; it has unhappily not yet been translated
into English), that metaphysics is repudiated altogether, and
epistemology is set in its place.  But this rejection of metaphysics
does not necessarily imply the denial of the value of such an analysis
of our experience as I have in this work called metaphysical.
Metaphysics is taken to mean, not an analysis of experience, but a
groping behind the veil of phenomena for some reality not given in
experience.  In other words, what Professor Cornelius condemns is what
many of the rest of us also condemn under another name.  What he calls
metaphysics, we call bad metaphysics; and what he calls epistemology,
we call metaphysics.  The dispute is really a dispute touching the
proper name to apply to reflective analysis of a certain kind.

As it is the fashion in certain quarters to abuse metaphysics, I set
the reader on his guard.  Some kinds of metaphysics certainly ought to
be repudiated under whatever name they may be presented to us.




CHAPTER XX

THE PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION

76. RELIGION AND REFLECTION.--A man may be through and through ethical
in his thought and feeling, and yet know nothing of the science of
ethics.  He may be possessed of the finest aesthetic taste, and yet may
know nothing of the science of aesthetics.  It is one thing to be good,
and another to know clearly what goodness means; it is one thing to
love the beautiful, and another to know how to define it.

Just so a man may be thoroughly religious, and may, nevertheless, have
reflected very little upon his religious belief and the foundations
upon which it rests.  This does not mean that his belief is without
foundation.  It may have a firm basis or it may not.  But whatever the
case may be, he is not in a position to say much about it.  He _feels_
that he is right, but he cannot prove it.  The man is, I think we must
admit, rather blind as to the full significance of his position, and he
is, in consequence, rather helpless.

Such a man is menaced by certain dangers.  We have seen in the chapter
on ethics that men are by no means at one in their judgments as to the
rightness or wrongness of given actions.  And it requires a very little
reflection to teach us that men are not at one in their religious
notions.  God and His nature, the relation of God to man, what the
religious life should be, these things are the subject of much dispute;
and some men hold opinions regarded by others as not merely erroneous
but highly pernicious in their influence.

Shall a man simply assume that the opinions which he happens to hold
are correct, and that all who differ with him are in error?  He has not
framed his opinions quite independently for himself.  We are all
influenced by what we have inherited from the past, and what we inherit
may be partly erroneous, even if we be right in the main.  Moreover, we
are all liable to prejudices, and he who has no means of distinguishing
such from sober truths may admit into his creed many errors.  The
lesson of history is very instructive upon this point.  The fact is
that a man's religious notions reflect the position which he occupies
in the development of civilization very much as do his ethical notions.

Again.  Even supposing that a man has enlightened notions and is living
a religious life that the most instructed must approve; if he has never
reflected, and has never tried to make clear to himself just what he
really does believe and upon what grounds he believes it, how will it
be with him when his position is attacked by another?  Men are, as I
have said, not at one in these matters, and there are few or none of
the doctrines put forward as religions that have not been attacked
again and again.

Now, those who depend only upon an instinctive feeling may be placed in
the very painful position of seeing no answer to the objections brought
against them.  What is said may seem plausible; it may even seem true,
and is it right for a man to oppose what appears to be the truth?  One
may be shocked and pained, and may feel that he who makes the assault
_cannot_ be right, and yet may be forced to admit that a relentless
logic, or what presents itself as such, has every appearance of
establishing the repellent truth that robs one of one's dearest
possession.  The situation is an unendurable one; it is that of the man
who guards a treasure and recognizes that there is no lock on the door.

Surely, if there is error mixed with truth in our religious beliefs, it
is desirable that we should have some way of distinguishing between the
truth and the error.  And if our beliefs really have a foundation, it
is desirable that we should know what that foundation is, and should
not be at the mercy of every passer-by who takes the notion to throw a
stone at us.  But these desirable ends, it seems clear, cannot be
attained without reflection.

77. THE PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.--The reflection that busies itself with
these things results in what is called the philosophy of religion.  To
show that the name is an appropriate one and that we are concerned with
a philosophical discipline, I shall take up for a moment the idea of
God, which most men will admit has a very important place in our
conception of religion.

Does God exist?  We may feel very sure that He does, and yet be forced
to admit that the evidence of His existence is not so clear and
undeniable as to compel the assent of every one.  We do not try to
prove the existence of the men we meet and who talk to us.  No one
thinks of denying their existence; it is taken for granted.  Even the
metaphysician, when he takes up and discusses the question whether we
can prove the existence of any mind beyond our own, does not seriously
doubt whether there are other minds or not.  It is not so much what we
know, as how we know it, that interests him.

But with the existence of God it is different.  That men do not think
that an examination of the evidence can be dispensed with is evident
from the books that are written and lectures that are delivered year
after year.  There seem to be honest differences of opinion, and we
feel compelled to offer men proofs--to show that belief is reasonable.

How shall we determine whether this world in which we live is such a
world that we may take it as a revelation of God?  And of what sort of
a Being are we speaking when we use the word "God"?  The question is
not an idle one, for men's conceptions have differed widely.  There is
the savage, with a conception that strikes the modern civilized man as
altogether inadequate; there is the thoughtful man of our day, who has
inherited the reflections of those who have lived in the ages gone by.

And there is the philosopher, or, perhaps, I should rather say, there
are the philosophers.  Have they not conceived of God as a group of
abstract notions, or as a something that may best be described as the
Unknowable, or as the Substance which is the identity of thought and
extension, or as the external world itself?  All have not sinned in
this way, but some have, and they are not men whom we can ignore.

If we turn from all such notions and, in harmony with the faith of the
great body of religious men in the ages past, some of whom were
philosophers but most of whom were not, cling close to the notion that
God is a mind or spirit, and must be conceived according to the
analogy, at least, of the human mind, the mind we most directly
know--if we do this, we are still confronted by problems to which the
thoughtful man cannot refuse attention.

What do we mean by a mind?  This is a question to which one can
scarcely give an intelligent answer unless one has exercised one's
faculty of philosophic reflection.  And upon what sort of evidence does
one depend in establishing the existence of minds other than one's own?
This has been discussed at length in Chapter X, and the problem is
certainly a metaphysical one.  And if we believe that the Divine Mind
is not subject to the limitations which confine the human, how shall we
conceive it?  The question is an important one.  Some of the
philosophers and theologians who have tried to free the Divine Mind
from such limitations have taken away every positive mark by which we
recognize a mind to be such, and have left us a naked "Absolute" which
is no better than a labeled vacuum.

Moreover, we cannot refuse to consider the question of God's relation
to the world.  This seems to lead back to the broader question: How are
we to conceive of any mind as related to the world?  What is the
relation between mind and matter?  If any subject of inquiry may
properly be called metaphysical, surely this may be.

We see, then, that there is little wonder that the thoughtful
consideration of the facts and doctrines of religion has taken its
place among the philosophical sciences.  Aesthetics has been called
applied psychology; and I think it is scarcely too much to say that we
are here concerned with applied metaphysics, with the attempt to obtain
a clear understanding of the significance of the facts of religion in
the light of those ultimate analyses which reveal to us the real nature
of the world of matter and of minds.




CHAPTER XXI

PHILOSOPHY AND THE OTHER SCIENCES

78. THE PHILOSOPHICAL AND NON-PHILOSOPHICAL SCIENCES.--We have seen in
the preceding chapters that certain of the sciences can scarcely be
cultivated successfully in complete separation from philosophy.  It has
also been indicated in various places that the relation of other
sciences to philosophy is not so close.

Thus, the sciences of arithmetic, algebra, and geometry may be
successfully prosecuted by a man who has reflected little upon the
nature of numbers and who has never asked himself seriously what he
means by space.  The assumptions which he is justified in making, and
the kind of operations which he has the right to perform, do not seem,
as a rule, to be in doubt.

So it is also in the sciences of chemistry and physics.  There is
nothing to prevent the chemist or the physicist from being a
philosopher, but he is not compelled to be one.  He may push forward
the investigations proper to his profession regardless of the type of
philosophy which it pleases him to adopt.  Whether he be a realist or
an idealist, a dualist or a monist, he should, as chemist or physicist,
treat the same sort of facts in the same sort of a way.  His path
appears to be laid out for him, and he can do work the value of which
is undisputed by traveling quietly along it, and without stopping to
consider consciously what kind of a path it is.  There are many who
work in this way, and they succeed in making important contributions to
human knowledge.

Such sciences as these I call the non-philosophical sciences to
distinguish them from the group of sciences I have been discussing at
length.  What marks them out is, that the facts with which the
investigator has to deal are known by him with sufficient clearness to
leave him usually in little doubt as to the use which he can make of
them.  His knowledge is clear enough for the purpose in hand, and his
work is justified by its results.  What is the relation of such
sciences as these to philosophy?

79. THE STUDY OF SCIENTIFIC PRINCIPLES AND METHODS.--It is one thing to
have the instinct of the investigator and to be able to feel one's way
along the road that leads to new knowledge of a given kind, and it is
another thing to have the reflective turn of mind that makes one
clearly conscious of just what one has been doing and how one has been
doing it.  Men reasoned before there was a science of logic, and the
sciences made their appearance before what may be called the logic of
the sciences had its birth.

"It may be truly asserted," writes Professor Jevons,[1] "that the rapid
progress of the physical sciences during the last three centuries has
not been accompanied by a corresponding advance in the theory of
reasoning.  Physicists speak familiarly of Scientific Method, but they
could not readily describe what they mean by that expression.
Profoundly engaged in the study of particular classes of natural
phenomena, they are usually too much engrossed in the immense and ever
accumulating details of their special sciences to generalize upon the
methods of reasoning which they unconsciously employ.  Yet few will
deny that these methods of reasoning ought to be studied, especially by
those who endeavor to introduce scientific order into less successful
and methodical branches of knowledge."

Professor Jevons suggests that it is lack of time and attention that
prevents the scientific investigator from attaining to a clear
conception of what is meant by scientific method.  This has something
to do with it, but I think we may also maintain that the work of the
investigator and that of the critic are somewhat different in kind, and
require somewhat different powers of mind.  We find a parallel to this
elsewhere.  Both in literature and in art men may be in the best sense
productive, and yet may be poor critics.  We are often wofully
disappointed when we attend a lecture on poetry by a poet, or one on
painting by an artist.

It may be said: If what is maintained above regarding the possibility
of prosecuting scientific researches without having recourse to
reflective thought is true, why should the man of science care whether
the principles and methods of the non-philosophical sciences are
investigated or are merely taken for granted?

I answer: It should be observed that the statements made in the last
section were somewhat guarded.  I have used the expressions "as a rule"
and "usually."  I have spoken thus because one can work in the way
described, without danger of error, only where a beaten track has been
attained and is followed.  In Chapter XVI it was pointed out that even
in the mathematical sciences one may be forced to reflect upon the
significance of one's symbols.  As I write this, a pamphlet comes to
hand which is concerned to prove that "every cause is potentially
capable of producing several effects," and proves it by claiming that
the square root of four ([square root symbol]4) is a _cause_ which may
have as _effect_ either two (2) or minus two (-2).

Is this mathematical reasoning?  Are mathematical relations ever those
of cause and effect?  And may one on the basis of such reasonings claim
that in nature the relation of cause and effect is not a fixed and
invariable one?

Even where there is a beaten track, there is some danger that men may
wander from it.  And on the confines of our knowledge there are fields
in which the accepted road is yet to be established.  Science makes
constant use of hypotheses as an aid to investigation.  What hypotheses
may one frame, and what are inadmissible?  How important an
investigation of this question may be to the worker in certain branches
of science will be clear to one who will read with attention Professor
Poincaré's brilliant little work on "Science and Hypothesis." [2]

There is no field in art, literature, or science in which the work of
the critic is wholly superfluous.  "There are periods in the growth of
science," writes Professor Pearson in his deservedly popular work, "The
Grammar of Science," [3] "when it is well to turn our attention from
its imposing superstructure and to examine carefully its foundations.
The present book is primarily intended as a criticism of the
fundamental concepts of modern science, and as such finds its
justification in the motto placed upon its title-page."  The motto in
question is a quotation from the French philosopher Cousin: "Criticism
is the life of science."

We have seen in Chapter XVI that a work on logic may be a comparatively
simple thing.  It may describe the ways in which men reason when they
reason correctly, and may not go deep into metaphysical questions.  On
the other hand, it may be deeply metaphysical.

When we approach the part of logic which deals with the principles and
methods of the sciences, this difference is forced upon our attention.
One may set forth the assumptions upon which a science rests, and may
describe the methods of investigation employed, without going much
below the plane of common thought.  As a type of such works I may
mention the useful treatise by Professor Jevons cited earlier in this
chapter.

On the other hand, our investigations may be more profound, and we may
scrutinize the very foundations upon which a science rests.  Both the
other works referred to illustrate this method of procedure.

For example, in "The Grammar of Science," we find our author
discussing, under the title "The Facts of Science," such problems as
the following: the Reality of Things; Sense-impressions and
Consciousness; the Nature of Thought; the External Universe; Sensations
as the Ultimate Source of the Materials of Knowledge; and the Futility
of "Things-in-themselves."  The philosophical character of such
discussions does not need to be pointed out at length.


[1] "The Principles Of Science," London, 1874, Preface.

[2] English translation, New York, 1905.

[3] Second edition, London, 1900.




VI. ON THE STUDY OF PHILOSOPHY


CHAPTER XXII

THE VALUE OF THE STUDY OF PHILOSOPHY

80. THE QUESTION OF PRACTICAL UTILITY.--Why should men study
philosophy?  The question is a natural one, for man is a rational
being, and when the worth of a thing is not at once evident to him, he
usually calls for proof of its worth.  Our professional schools, with
the exception of schools of theology, usually pay little attention to
philosophical studies; but such studies occupy a strong position in our
colleges, and a vast number of persons not students in the technical
sense think it worth while to occupy themselves with them more or less.
Wherever liberal studies are prosecuted they have their place, and it
is an honored place.  Is this as it should be?

Before we ask whether any given study is of practical value, it is wise
to determine what the word "practical" shall be taken to mean.  Shall
we say that we may call practical only such learning as can be turned
to direct account in earning money later?  If we restrict the meaning
of the word in this way, we seem to strike a blow at liberal studies in
general.

Thus, no one would think of maintaining that the study of mathematics
is not of practical value--sometimes and to some persons.  The
physicist and the engineer need to know a good deal about mathematics.
But how is it with the merchant, the lawyer, the clergyman, the
physician?  How much of their algebra, geometry, and trigonometry do
these remember after they have become absorbed in the practice of their
several callings, and how often do they find it necessary to use
anything beyond certain simple rules of arithmetic?

Sometimes we are tempted to condemn the study of the classics as
unpractical, and to turn instead to the modern languages and to the
physical sciences.  Now, it is, of course, a fair question to ask what
should and what should not be regarded as forming part of a liberal
education, and I shall make no effort to decide the question here.  But
it should be borne well in mind that one cannot decide it by
determining what studies are practical in the sense of the word under
discussion.

If we keep strictly to this sense, the modern languages are to the
majority of Americans of little more practical value than are the Latin
and Greek.  We scarcely need them except when we travel abroad, and
when we do that we find that the concierge and the waiter use English
with surprising fluency.  As for the sciences, those who expect to earn
a living through a knowledge of them, seek, as a rule, that knowledge
in a technical or professional school, and the rest of us can enjoy the
fruit of their labors without sharing them.  It is a popular fallacy
that because certain studies have a practical value to the world at
large, they must necessarily have a practical value to every one, and
can be recommended to the individual on that account.  It is worth
while to sit down quietly and ask oneself how many of the bits of
information acquired during the course of a liberal education are
directly used in the carrying on of a given business or in the practice
of a given profession.

Nevertheless, we all believe that liberal education is a good thing for
the individual and for the race.  One must not too much restrict the
meaning of the word "practical."  A civilized state composed of men who
know nothing save what has a direct bearing upon their especial work in
life is an absurdity; it cannot exist.  There must be a good deal of
general enlightenment and there must be a considerable number of
individuals who have enjoyed a high measure of enlightenment.

This becomes clear if we consider the part played in the life of the
state by the humblest tradesman.  If he is to be successful, he must be
able to read, write, and keep his accounts, and make, let us say,
shoes.  But when we have said this, we have summed him up as a workman,
but not as a man, and he is also a man.  He may marry, and make a good
or a bad husband, and a good or a bad father.  He stands in relations
to his neighborhood, to the school, and to the church; and he is not
without his influence.  He may be temperate or intemperate, frugal or
extravagant, law-abiding or the reverse.  He has his share, and no
small share, in the government of his city and of his state.  His
influence is indeed far-reaching, and that it may be an influence for
good, he is in need of all the intellectual and moral enlightenment
that we can give him.  It is of the utmost practical utility to the
state that he should know a vast number of things which have no direct
bearing upon the making and mending of shoes.

And if this is true in the case of the tradesman, it is scarcely
necessary to point out that the physician, the lawyer, the clergyman,
and the whole army of those whom we regard as the leaders of men and
the molders of public opinion have spheres of non-professional activity
of great importance to the state.  They cannot be mere specialists if
they would.  They must influence society for good or ill; and if they
are ignorant and unenlightened, their influence cannot be good.

When we consider the life of man in a broad way, we see how essential
it is that many men should be brought to have a share in what has been
gained by the long travail of the centuries past.  It will not do to
ask at every step whether they can put to direct professional use every
bit of information gained.  Literature and science, sweetness and
light, beauty and truth, these are the heritage of the modern world;
and unless these permeate its very being, society must undergo
degeneration.  It is this conviction that has led to the high
appreciation accorded by intelligent men to courses of liberal study,
and among such courses those which we have recognized as philosophical
must take their place.

81. WHY PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES ARE USEFUL.--But let us ask a little more
specifically what is to be gained by pursuing distinctively
philosophical studies.  Why should those who go to college, or
intelligent persons who cannot go to college, care to interest
themselves in logic and ethics, psychology and metaphysics?  Are not
these studies rather dry, in the first place, and rather profitless, in
the second?

As to the first point, I should stoutly maintain that if they are dry,
it is somebody's fault.  The most sensational of novels would be dry if
couched in the language which some philosophers have seen fit to use in
expressing their thoughts.  He who defines "existence" as "the still
and simple precipitate of the oscillation between beginning to be and
ceasing to be" has done his best to alienate our affections from the
subject of his predilection.

But it is not in the least necessary to talk in this way about matters
philosophical.  He who is not a slave to tradition can use plain and
simple language.  To be sure, there are some subjects, especially in
the field of metaphysics, into which the student cannot expect to see
very deeply at the outset of his studies.  Men do not expect to
understand the more difficult problems of mathematics without making a
good deal of preparation; but, unhappily, they sometimes expect to have
the profoundest problems of metaphysics made luminous to them in one or
two popular lectures.

Philosophical studies are not dry, when men are properly taught, and
are in a position to understand what is said.  They deal with the most
fascinating of problems.  It is only necessary to pierce through the
husk of words which conceals the thoughts of the philosopher, and we
shall find the kernel palatable, indeed.  Nor are such studies
profitless, to take up our second point.  Let us see what we may gain
from them.

Let us begin with logic--the traditional logic commonly taught to
beginners.  Is it worth while to study this?  Surely it is.  No one who
has not tried to introduce the average under-graduate to logic can
realize how blindly he uses his reasoning powers, how unconscious he is
of the full meaning of the sentences he employs, how easily he may be
entrapped by fallacious reasonings where he is not set on his guard by
some preposterous conclusion touching matters with which he is familiar.

And he is not merely unconscious of the lapses in his processes of
reasoning, and of his imperfect comprehension of the significance of
his statements; he is unconscious also of the mass of inherited and
acquired prejudices, often quite indefensible, which he unquestioningly
employs as premises.

He fairly represents the larger world beyond the walls of the college.
It is a world in which prejudices are assumed as premises, and loose
reasonings pass current and are unchallenged until they beget some
unpalatable conclusion.  It is a world in which men take little pains
to think carefully and accurately unless they are dealing with
something touching which it is practically inconvenient to make a
mistake.

He who studies logic in the proper way is not filling his mind with
useless facts; he is simply turning the light upon his own thinking
mind, and realizing more clearly what he has always done rather blindly
and blunderingly.  He may completely forget the

  "Barbara, Celarent, Darii, Ferioque prioris,"

and he may be quite unable to give an account of the moods and figures
of the syllogism; but he cannot lose the critical habit if he once has
acquired it, and he cannot but be on his guard against himself as well
as against others.

There is a keen pleasure in gaining such insight.  It gives a feeling
of freedom and power, and rids one of that horrid sense that, although
this or that bit of reasoning is certainly bad, it is impossible to
tell just what is the matter with it.  And as for its practical
utility, if it is desirable to get rid of prejudice and confusion, and
to possess a clear and reasonable mind, then anything that makes for
this must be of value.

Of the desirability that all who can afford the luxury of a liberal
education should do some serious reading in ethics, it seems hardly
necessary to speak.  The deficiencies of the ethics of the unreflective
have already been touched upon in Chapter XVIII.

But I cannot forbear dwelling upon it again.  What thoughtful man is
not struck with the variety of ethical standards which obtain in the
same community?  The clergyman who has a strong sense of responsibility
for the welfare of his flock is sometimes accused of not sufficiently
realizing the importance of a frank expression of the whole truth about
things; the man of science, whose duty it seems to be to peer into the
mysteries of the universe, and to tell what he sees or what he guesses,
is accused of an indifference to the effect which his utterances may
have upon the less enlightened who hear him speak; many criticise the
lawyer for a devotion to the interests of his client which is at times
in doubtful harmony with the interests of justice in the larger sense;
in the business world commercial integrity is exalted, and lapses from
the ethical code which do not assail this cardinal virtue are not
always regarded with equal seriousness.

It is as though men elected to worship at the shrine of a particular
saint, and were inclined to overlook the claims of others.  For all
this there is, of course, a reason; such things are never to be looked
upon as mere accident.  But this does not mean that these more or less
conflicting standards are all to be accepted as satisfactory and as
ultimate.  It is inevitable that those who study ethics seriously, who
really reflect upon ethical problems, should sometimes criticise the
judgments of their fellow-men rather unfavorably.

Of such independent criticism many persons have a strong distrust.  I
am reminded here of an eminent mathematician who maintained that the
study of ethics has a tendency to distort the student's judgments as to
what is right and what is wrong.  He had observed that there is apt to
be some divergence of opinion between those who think seriously upon
morals and those who do not, and he gave the preference to the
unthinking majority.

Now, there is undoubtedly danger that the independent thinker may be
betrayed into eccentricities of opinion which are unjustifiable and are
even dangerous.  But it seems a strange doctrine that it is, on the
whole, safer not to think, but rather to drift on the stream of public
opinion.  In other fields we are not inclined to believe that the
ignorant man, who has given no especial attention to a subject, is the
one likely to be right.  Why should it be so in morals?

That the youth who goes to college to seek a liberal education has a
need of ethical studies becomes very plain when we come to a
realization of the curious limitations of his ethical training as
picked up from his previous experience of the world.  He has some very
definite notions as to right and wrong.  He is as ready to maintain the
desirability of benevolence, justice, and veracity, as was Bishop
Butler, who wrote the famous "Analogy "; although, to be sure, he is
most inarticulate when called upon to explain what constitutes
benevolence, justice, or veracity.  But the strangest thing is, that he
seems to place some of the most important decisions of his whole life
quite outside the realm of right and wrong.

He may admit that a man should not undertake to be a clergyman, unless
he possesses certain qualifications of mind and character which
evidently qualify him for that profession.  But he does not see why he
has not the right to become a wearisome professor or an incompetent
physician, if he chooses to enter upon such a career.  Is a man not
free to take up what profession he pleases?  He must take the risk, of
course; but if he fails, he fails.

And when he is asked to consider from the point of view of ethics the
question of marriage and its responsibilities, he is at first inclined
to consider the whole subject as rather a matter for jest.  Has a man
not the right to marry or remain single exactly as he pleases?  And is
he not free to marry any one whom he can persuade to accept him?  To be
sure, he should be a little careful about marrying quite out of his
class, and he should not be hopelessly careless about money matters.
Thus, a decision, which may affect his whole life as much as any other
that he can be called upon to make, which may practically make it or
mar it, is treated as though it were not a matter of grave concern, but
a private affair, entailing no serious consequences to any one and
calling for no reflection.

I wish it could be said that the world outside of the college regarded
these matters in another light.  But the student faithfully represents
the opinions current in the community from which he comes.  And he
represents, unhappily, the teachings of the stage and of the world of
current fiction.  The influence of these is too often on the side of
inconsiderate passion, which stirs our sympathy and which lends itself
to dramatic effect.  With the writers of romance the ethical
philosophers have an ancient quarrel.

It may be said: But the world gets along very well as it is, and
without brooding too much upon ethical problems.  To this we may
answer: Does the world get along so very well, after all?  Are there no
evils that foresight and some firmness of character might have
obviated?  And when we concern ourselves with the educated classes, at
least, the weight of whose influence is enormous, is it too much to
maintain that they should do some reading and thinking in the field of
ethics? should strive to attain to clear vision and correct judgment on
the whole subject of man's duties?

Just at the present time, when psychological studies have so great a
vogue, one scarcely feels compelled to make any sort of an apology for
them.  It is assumed on all hands that it is desirable to study
psychology, and courses of lectures are multiplied in all quarters.

Probably some of this interest has its root in the fallacy touched upon
earlier in this chapter.  The science of psychology has revolutionized
educational theory.  When those of us who have arrived at middle life
look back and survey the tedious and toilsome path along which we were
unwillingly driven in our schoolboy days, and then see how smooth and
pleasant it has been made since, we are impelled to honor all who have
contributed to this result.  Moreover, it seems very clear that
teachers of all grades should have some acquaintance with the nature of
the minds that they are laboring to develop, and that they should not
be left to pick up their information for themselves--a task
sufficiently difficult to an unobservant person.

These considerations furnish a sufficient ground for extolling the
science of psychology, and for insisting that studies in it should form
some part of the education of a teacher.  But why should the rest of us
care for such studies?

To this one may answer, in the first place, that nearly all of us have,
or ought to have, some responsibility for the education of children;
and, in the second, that we deal with the minds of others every day in
every walk in life, and it can certainly do no harm to have our
attention called to the way in which minds function.  To be sure, some
men are by nature tactful, and instinctively conscious of how things
strike the minds of those about them.  But even such persons may gain
helpful suggestions, and, at least, have the habit of attention to the
mental processes of others confirmed in them.  How often we are
impressed at church, at the public lecture, and in private
conversations, with the fact that the speaker lives in blissful
unconsciousness of what can be understood by or can possibly interest
his hearers!  For the confirmed bore, there is, perhaps, no cure; but
it seems as though something might be done for those who are afflicted
to a minor degree.

And this brings me to another consideration, which is that a proper
study of psychology ought to be of service in revealing to a man his
own nature.  It should show him what he is, and this is surely a first
step toward becoming something better.  It is wonderful how blind men
may be with regard to what passes in their own minds and with regard to
their own peculiarities.  When they learn to reflect, they come to a
clearer consciousness of themselves--it is as though a lamp were
lighted within them.  One may, it is true, study psychology without
attaining to any of the good results suggested above; but, for that
matter, there is no study which may not be pursued in a profitless way,
if the teacher be sufficiently unskilled and the pupil sufficiently
thoughtless.

82. METAPHYSICS AND PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.--Perhaps it will be said:
For such philosophical studies as the above a good defense may perhaps
be made, but can one defend in the same way the plunge into the
obscurities of metaphysics?  In this field no two men seem to be wholly
agreed, and if they were, what would it signify?  Whether we call
ourselves monists or dualists, idealists or realists, Lockians or
Kantians, must we not live and deal with the things about us in much
the same way?

Those who have dipped into metaphysical studies deeply enough to see
what the problems discussed really are; who have been able to reach the
ideas concealed, too often, under a rather forbidding terminology; who
are not of the dogmatic turn of mind which insists upon unquestioned
authority and is repelled by the uncertainties which must confront
those who give themselves to reflective thought,--these will hardly
need to be persuaded that it is desirable to give some attention to the
question: What sort of a world, after all, is this world in which we
live?  What is its meaning?

To many men the impulse to peer into these things is over-powering, and
the pleasure of feeling their insight deepen is extremely keen.  What
deters us in most instances is not the conviction that such
investigations are not, or should not be, interesting, but rather the
difficulty of the approach.  It is not easy to follow the path which
leads from the world of common thought into the world of philosophical
reflection.  One becomes bewildered and discouraged at the outset.
Sometimes, after listening to the directions of guides who disagree
among themselves, we are tempted to believe that there can be no
certain path to the goal which we have before us.

But, whatever the difficulties and uncertainties of our task, a little
reflection must show that it is not one which has no significance for
human life.

Men can, it is true, eat and sleep and go through the routine of the
day, without giving thought to science or religion or philosophy, but
few will defend such an existence.  As a matter of fact, those who have
attained to some measure of intellectual and moral development do
assume, consciously or unconsciously, some rather definite attitude
toward life, and this is not independent of their conviction as to what
the world is and means.

Metaphysical speculations run out into the philosophy of religion; and,
on the other hand, religious emotions and ideals have again and again
prompted men to metaphysical construction.  A glance at history shows
that it is natural to man to embrace some attitude toward the system of
things, and to try to justify this by reasoning.  Vigorous and
independent minds have given birth to theories, and these have been
adopted by others.  The influence of such theories upon the evolution
of humanity has been enormous.

Ideas have ruled and still rule the world, some of them very abstract
ideas.  It does not follow that one is uninfluenced by them, when one
has no knowledge of their source or of their original setting.  They
become part of the intellectual heritage of us all, and we sometimes
suppose that we are responsible for them ourselves.  Has not the fact
that an idealistic or a materialistic type of thought has been current
at a particular time influenced the outlook on life of many who have
themselves devoted little attention to philosophy?  It would be
interesting to know how many, to whom Spencer is but a name, have felt
the influence of the agnosticism of which he was the apostle.

I say this without meaning to criticise here any of the types of
doctrine referred to.  My thesis is only that philosophy and life go
hand in hand, and that the prying into the deeper mysteries of the
universe cannot be regarded as a matter of no practical moment.  Its
importance ought to be admitted even by the man who has little hope
that he will himself be able to attain to a doctrine wholly
satisfactory and wholly unshakable.

For, if the study of the problems of metaphysics does nothing else for
a given individual, it, at least, enables him to comprehend and
criticise intelligently the doctrines which are presented for his
acceptance by others.  It is a painful thing to feel quite helpless in
the face of plausible reasonings which may threaten to rob us of our
most cherished hopes, or may tend to persuade us of the vanity of what
we have been accustomed to regard as of highest worth.  If we are quite
unskilled in the examination of such doctrines, we may be captured by
the loosest of arguments--witness the influence of Spencer's argument
for the "Unknowable," in the "First Principles"; and if we are ignorant
of the history of speculative thought, we may be carried away by old
and exploded notions which pose as modern and impressive only because
they have been given a modern dress.

We can, of course, refuse to listen to those who would talk with us.
But this savors of bigotry, and the world will certainly not grow
wiser, if men generally cultivate a blind adherence to the opinions in
which they happen to be brought up.  A cautious conservatism is one
thing, and blind obstinacy is another.  To the educated man (and it is
probable that others will have to depend on opinions taken at second
hand) a better way of avoiding error is open.

Finally, it will not do to overlook the broadening influence of such
studies as we are discussing.  How dogmatically men are in the habit of
expressing themselves upon those obscure and difficult problems which
deal with matters that lie on the confines of human knowledge!  Such an
assumption of knowledge cannot but make us uncomprehending and
unsympathetic.

There are many subjects upon which, if we hold an opinion at all, we
should hold it tentatively, waiting for more light, and retaining a
willingness to be enlightened.  Many a bitter and fruitless quarrel
might be avoided, if more persons found it possible to maintain this
philosophical attitude of mind.  Philosophy is, after all, reflection,
and the reflective man must realize that he is probably as liable to
error as are other men.  He is not infallible, nor has the limit of
human knowledge been attained in his day and generation.  He who
realizes this will not assume that his neighbor is always wrong, and he
will come to have that wide, conscientious tolerance, which is not
indifference, but which is at the farthest remove from the zeal of mere
bigotry.




CHAPTER XXIII

WHY WE SHOULD STUDY THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY

83. THE PROMINENCE GIVEN TO THE SUBJECT.--When one reflects upon the
number of lecture courses given every year at our universities and
colleges on the history of philosophy, one is struck by the fact that
philosophy is not treated as are most other subjects with which the
student is brought into contact.

If we study mathematics, or chemistry, or physics, or physiology, or
biology, the effort is made to lay before us in a convenient form the
latest results which have been attained in those sciences.  Of their
history very little is said; and, indeed, as we have seen (section 6),
lectures on the history of the inductive sciences are apt to be
regarded as philosophical in their character and aims rather than as
merely scientific.

The interest in the history of philosophy is certainly not a
diminishing one.  Text-books covering the whole field or a part of it
are multiplied; extensive studies are made and published covering the
work of individual philosophers; innumerable historical discussions
make their appearance in the pages of current philosophical journals.
No student is regarded as fairly acquainted with philosophy who knows
nothing of Plato and Aristotle, Descartes and Spinoza, Berkeley and
Hume, Kant and Hegel, and the rest.  We should look upon him as having
a very restricted outlook if he had read only the works of the thinkers
of our own day; indeed, we should not expect him to have a proper
comprehension even of these, for their chapters must remain blind and
meaningless to one who has no knowledge of what preceded them and has
given birth to the doctrines there set forth.

It is a fair question to ask: Why is philosophy so bound up with the
study of the past?  Why may we not content ourselves with what has up
to the present been attained, and omit a survey of the road along which
our predecessors have traveled?

84. THE ESPECIAL IMPORTANCE OF HISTORICAL STUDIES TO REFLECTIVE
THOUGHT.--In some of the preceding chapters dealing with the various
philosophical sciences, it has been indicated that, in the sciences we
do not regard as philosophical, men may work on the basis of certain
commonly accepted assumptions and employ methods which are generally
regarded as trustworthy within the given field.  The value both of the
fundamental assumptions and of the methods of investigation appear to
be guaranteed by the results attained.  There are not merely
observation and hypothesis; there is also verification, and where this
is lacking, men either abandon their position or reserve their judgment.

Thus, a certain body of interrelated facts is built up, the
significance of which, in many fields at least, is apparent even to the
layman.  Nor is it wholly beyond him to judge whether the results of
scientific investigations can be verified.  An eclipse, calculated by
methods which he is quite unable to follow, may occur at the appointed
hour and confirm his respect for the astronomer.  The efficacy of a
serum in the cure of diseases may convince him that work done in the
laboratory is not labor lost.

It seems evident that the several sciences do really rise on stepping
stones of their dead selves, and that those selves of the past are
really dead and superseded.  Who would now think of going back for his
science to Plato's "Timaeus," or would accept the description of the
physical world contained in the works of Aristotle?  What chemist or
physicist need busy himself with the doctrine of atoms and their
clashings presented in the magnificent poem of Lucretius?  Who can
forbear a smile--a sympathetic one--when he turns over the pages of
Augustine's "City of God," and sees what sort of a world this
remarkable man believed himself to inhabit?

It is the historic and human interest that carries us back to these
things.  We say: What ingenuity! what a happy guess! how well that was
reasoned in the light of what was actually known about the world in
those days!  But we never forget that what compels our admiration does
so because it makes us realize that we stand in the presence of a great
mind, and not because it is a foundation-stone in the great edifice
which science has erected.

But it is not so in philosophy.  It is not possible to regard the
philosophical reflections of Plato and of Aristotle as superseded in
the same sense in which we may so regard their science.  The reason for
this lies in the difference between scientific thought and reflective
thought.

The two have been contrasted in Chapter II of this volume.  It was
there pointed out that the sort of thinking demanded in the special
sciences is not so very different from that with which we are all
familiar in common life.  Science is more accurate and systematic, it
has a broader outlook, and it is free from the imperfections which
vitiate the uncritical and fragmentary knowledge which experience of
the world yields the unscientific.  But, after all, the world is much
the same sort of a world to the man of science and to his uncritical
neighbor.  The latter can, as we have seen, understand what, in
general, the former is doing, and can appropriate many of his results.

On the other hand, it often happens that the man who has not, with
pains and labor, learned to reflect, cannot even see that the
philosopher has a genuine problem before him.  Thus, the plain man
accepts the fact that he has a mind and that it knows the world.  That
both mental phenomena and physical phenomena should be carefully
observed and classified he may be ready to admit.  But that the very
conceptions of mind and of what it means to know a world are vague and
indefinite in the extreme, and stand in need of careful analysis, he
does not realize.

In other words, he sees that our knowledge needs to be extended and
rendered more accurate and reliable, but he does not see that, if we
are to think clearly and consciously, all our knowledge needs to be
gone over in a different way.  In common life it is quite possible to
use in the attainment of practical ends knowledge which has not been
analyzed and of the full meaning of which we are ignorant.  I hope it
has become evident in the course of this volume that something closely
analogous is true in the field of science.  The man of science may
measure space and time, and may study the phenomena of the human mind,
without even attempting to answer all the questions which may be raised
as to what is meant, in the last analysis, by such concepts as space,
time, and the mind.

That such concepts should be analyzed has, I hope, been made clear, if
only that erroneous and misleading notions as to these things should be
avoided.  But when a man with a genius for metaphysical analysis
addresses himself to this task, he cannot simply hand the results
attained by his reflections over to his less reflective fellow-man.
His words are not understood; he seems to be dealing with shadows, with
unrealities; he has passed from the real world of common thought into
another world which appears to have little relation to the former.

Nor can verification, indubitable proof, be demanded and furnished as
it can in many parts of the field cultivated by the special sciences.
We may judge science fairly well without ourselves being scientists,
but it is not possible to judge philosophy without being to some extent
a philosopher.

In other words, the conclusions of reflective thought must be judged by
following the process and discovering its cogency or the reverse.
Thus, when the philosopher lays before us an argument to prove that we
must regard the only ultimate reality in the world as unknowable, and
must abandon our theistic convictions, how shall we make a decision as
to whether he is right or is wrong?  May we expect that the day will
come when he will be justified or condemned as is the astronomer on the
day predicted for an eclipse?  Neither the philosophy of Locke, nor
that of Descartes, nor that of Kant, can be vindicated as can a
prediction touching an eclipse of the sun.  To judge these men, we must
learn to think with them, to survey the road by which they travel; and
this we cannot do until we have learned the art.

Whether we like to admit it or not, we must admit, if we are
fair-minded and intelligent, that philosophy cannot speak with the same
authority as science, where science has been able to verify its
results.  There are, of course, scientific hypotheses and speculations
which should be regarded as being quite as uncertain as anything
brought forward by the philosophers.  But, admitting this, the fact
remains that there is a difference between the two fields as a whole,
and that the philosopher should learn not to speak with an assumption
of authority.  No final philosophy has been attained, so palpably firm
in its foundation, and so admittedly trustworthy in its construction,
that we are justified in saying: Now we need never go back to the past
unless to gratify the historic interest.  It is a weakness of young
men, and of older men of partisan temper, to feel very sure of matters
which, in the nature of things, must remain uncertain.

Since these things are so, and since men possess the power of
reflection in very varying degree, it is not surprising that we find it
worth while to turn back and study the thoughts of those who have had a
genius for reflection, even though they lived at a time when modern
science was awaiting its birth.  Some things cannot be known until
other things are known; often there must be a vast collection of
individual facts before the generalizations of science can come into
being.  But many of the problems with which reflective thought is still
struggling have not been furthered in the least by information which
has been collected during the centuries which have elapsed since they
were attacked by the early Greek philosophers.

Thus, we are still discussing the distinction between "appearance" and
"reality," and many and varied are the opinions at which philosophers
arrive.  But Thales, who heads the list of the Greek philosophers, had
quite enough material, given in his own experience, to enable him to
solve this problem as well as any modern philosopher, had he been able
to use the material.  He who is familiar with the history of philosophy
will recognize that, although one may smile at Augustine's accounts of
the races of men, and of the spontaneous generation of small animals,
no one has a right to despise his profound reflections upon the nature
of time and the problems which arise out of its character as past,
present, and future.

The fact is that metaphysics does not lag behind because of our lack of
material to work with.  The difficulties we have to face are nothing
else than the difficulties of reflective thought.  Why can we not tell
clearly what we mean when we use the word "self," or speak of
"knowledge," or insist that we know an "external world"?  Are we not
concerned with the most familiar of experiences?  To be sure we
are--with experiences familiarly, but vaguely and unanalytically, known
and, hence, only half known.  All these experiences the great men of
the past had as well as we; and if they had greater powers of
reflection, perhaps they saw more deeply into them than we do.  At any
rate, we cannot afford to assume that they did not.

One thing, however, I must not omit to mention.  Although one man
cannot turn over bodily the results of his reflection to another, it by
no means follows that he cannot give the other a helping hand, or warn
him of dangers by himself stumbling into pitfalls, as the case may be.
We have an indefinite advantage over the solitary thinkers who opened
up the paths of reflection, for we have the benefit of their teaching.
And this brings me to a consideration which I must discuss in the next
section.

85. THE VALUE OF DIFFERENT POINTS OF VIEW.--The man who has not read is
like the man who has not traveled--he is not an intelligent critic, for
he has nothing with which to compare what falls within the little
circle of his experiences.  That the prevailing architecture of a town
is ugly can scarcely impress one who is acquainted with no other town.
If we live in a community in which men's manners are not good, and
their standard of living not the highest, our attention does not dwell
much upon the fact, unless some contrasted experience wakes within us a
clear consciousness of the difference.  That to which we are accustomed
we accept uncritically and unreflectively.  It is difficult for us to
see it somewhat as one might see it to whom it came as a new experience.

Of course, there may be in the one town buildings of more and of less
architectural beauty; and there may be in the one community differences
of opinion that furnish intellectual stimulus and keep awake the
critical spirit.  Still, there is such a thing as a prevalent type of
architecture, and there is such a thing as the spirit of the times.  He
who is carried along by the spirit of the age may easily conclude that
what is, is right, because he hears few raise their voices in protest.

To estimate justly the type of thought in which he has been brought up,
he must have something with which to compare it.  He must stand at a
distance, and try to judge it as he would judge a type of doctrine
presented to him for the first rime.  And in the accomplishment of this
task he can find no greater aid than the study of the history of
philosophy.

It is at first something of a shock to a man to discover that
assumptions which he has been accustomed to make without question have
been frankly repudiated by men quite as clever as he, and, perhaps,
more critical.  It opens the eyes to see that his standards of worth
have been weighed by others and have been found wanting.  It may well
incline him to reexamine reasonings in which he has detected no flaw,
when he finds that acute minds have tried them before, and have
declared them faulty.

Nor can it be without its influence upon his judgment of the
significance of a doctrine, when it becomes plain to him that this
significance can scarcely be fully comprehended until the history of
the doctrine is known.  For example, he thinks of the mind as somehow
in the body, as interacting with it, as a substance, and as immaterial.
In the course of his reading it begins to dawn upon his consciousness
that he has not thought all this out for himself; he has taken these
notions from others, who in turn have had them from their predecessors.
He begins to realize that he is not resting upon evidence independently
found in his own experience, but has upon his hands a sheaf of opinions
which are the echoes of old philosophies, and whose rise and
development can be traced over the stretch of the centuries.  Can he
help asking himself, when he sees this, whether the opinions in
question express the truth and the whole truth?  Is he not forced to
take the critical attitude toward them?

And when he views the succession of systems which pass in review before
him, noting how a truth may be dimly seen by one writer, denied by
another, taken up again and made clearer by a third, and so on, how can
he avoid the reflection that, as there was some error mixed with the
truth presented in earlier systems, so there probably is some error in
whatever may happen to be the form of doctrine generally received in
his own time?  The evolution of humanity is not yet at an end; men
still struggle to see clearly, and fall short of the ideal; it must be
a good thing to be freed from the dogmatic assumption of finality
natural to the man of limited outlook.  In studying the history of
philosophy sympathetically we are not merely calling to our aid critics
who possess the advantage of seeing things from a different point of
view, but we are reminding ourselves that we, too, are human and
fallible.

86. PHILOSOPHY AS POETRY, AND PHILOSOPHY AS SCIENCE.--The recognition
of the truth that the problems of reflection do not admit of easy
solution and that verification can scarcely be expected as it can in
the fields of the special sciences, need not, even when it is brought
home to us, as it is apt to be, by the study of the history of
philosophy, lead us to believe that philosophies are like the fashions,
a something gotten up to suit the taste of the day, and to be dismissed
without regret as soon as that taste changes.

Philosophy is sometimes compared with poetry.  It is argued that each
age must have its own poetry, even though it be inferior to that which
it has inherited from the past.  Just so, it is said, each age must
have its own philosophy, and the philosophy of an earlier age will not
satisfy its demands.  The implication is that in dealing with
philosophy we are not concerned with what is true or untrue in itself
considered, but with what is satisfying to us or the reverse.

Now, it would sound absurd to say that each age must have its own
geometry or its own physics.  The fact that it has long been known that
the sum of the interior angles of a plane triangle is equal to two
right angles, does not warrant me in repudiating that truth; nor am I
justified in doing so, and in believing the opposite, merely because I
find the statement uninteresting or distasteful.  When we are dealing
with such matters as these, we recognize that truth is truth, and that,
if we mistake it or refuse to recognize it, so much the worse for us.

Is it otherwise in philosophy?  Is it a perfectly proper thing that, in
one age, men should be idealists, and in another, materialists; in one,
theists, and in another, agnostics?  Is the distinction between true
and false nothing else than the distinction between what is in harmony
with the spirit of the times and what is not?

That it is natural that there should be such fluctuations of opinion,
we may freely admit.  Many things influence a man to embrace a given
type of doctrine, and, as we have seen, verification is a difficult
problem.  But have we here, any more than in other fields, the right to
assume that a doctrine was true at a given time merely because it
_seemed_ to men true at that time, or because they found it pleasing?
The history of science reveals that many things have long been believed
to be true, and, indeed, to be bound up with what were regarded as the
highest interests of man, and that these same things have later been
discovered to be false--not false merely for a later age, but false for
all time; as false when they were believed in as when they were
exploded and known to be exploded.  No man of sense believes that the
Ptolemaic system was true for a while, and that then the Copernican
became true.  We say that the former only _seemed_ true, and that the
enthusiasm of its adherents was a mistaken enthusiasm.

It is well to remember that philosophies are brought forward because it
is believed or hoped that they are true.  A fairy tale may be recited
and may be approved, although no one dreams of attaching faith to the
events narrated in it.  But a philosophy attempts to give us some
account of the nature of the world in which we live.  If the
philosopher frankly abandons the attempt to tell us what is true, and
with a Celtic generosity addresses himself to the task of saying what
will be agreeable to us, he loses his right to the title.  It is not
enough that he stirs our emotions, and works up his unrealities into
something resembling a poem.  It is not primarily his task to please,
as it is not the task of the serious worker in science to please those
whom he is called upon to instruct.  Truth is truth, whether it be
scientific truth or philosophical truth.  And error, no matter how
agreeable or how nicely adjusted to the temper of the times, is always
error.  If it is error in a field in which the detection and exposure
of error is difficult, it is the more dangerous, and the more should we
be on our guard against it.

We may, then, accept the lesson of the history of philosophy, to wit,
that we have no right to regard any given doctrine as final in such a
sense that it need no longer be held tentatively and as subject to
possible revision; but we need not, on that account, deny that
philosophy is, what it has in the past been believed to be, an earnest
search for truth.  A philosophy that did not even profess to be this
would not be listened to at all.  It would be regarded as too trivial
to merit serious attention.  If we take the word "science" in the broad
sense to indicate a knowledge of the truth more exact and satisfactory
than that which obtains in common life, we may say that every
philosophy worthy of the name is, at least, an attempt at scientific
knowledge.  Of course, this sense of the word "science" should not be
confused with that in which it has been used elsewhere in this volume.

87. HOW TO READ THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY.--He who takes up the history
of philosophy for the first time is apt to be impressed with the fact
that he is reading something that might not inaptly be called the
history of human error.

It begins with crude and, to the superficial spectator, seemingly
childish attempts in the field of physical science.  There are clever
guesses at the nature of the physical world, but the boldest of
speculations are entered upon with no apparent recognition of the
difficulty of the task undertaken, and with no realization of the need
for caution.  Somewhat later a different class of problems makes its
appearance--the problems which have to do with the mind and with the
nature of knowledge, reflective problems which scarcely seem to have
come fairly within the horizon of the earliest thinkers.

These problems even the beginner may be willing to recognize as
philosophical; but he may conscientiously harbor a doubt as to the
desirability of spending time upon the solutions which are offered.
System rises after system, and confronts him with what appear to be new
questions and new answers.  It seems as though each philosopher were
constructing a world for himself independently, and commanding him to
accept it, without first convincing him of his right to assume this
tone of authority and to set up for an oracle.  In all this conflict of
opinions where shall we seek for truth?  Why should we accept one man
as a teacher rather than another?  Is not the lesson to be gathered
from the whole procession of systems best summed up in the dictum of
Protagoras: "Man is the measure of all things"--each has his own truth,
and this need not be truth to another?

This, I say, is a first impression and a natural one.  I hasten to add:
this should not be the last impression of those who read with
thoughtful attention.

One thing should be emphasized at the outset: nothing will so often
bear rereading as the history of philosophy.  When we go over the
ground after we have obtained a first acquaintance with the teachings
of the different philosophers, we begin to realize that what we have in
our hands is, in a sense, a connected whole.  We see that if Plato and
Aristotle had not lived, we could not have had the philosophy which
passed current in the Middle Ages and furnished a foundation for the
teachings of the Church.  We realize that without this latter we could
not have had Descartes, and without Descartes we could not have had
Locke and Berkeley and Hume.  And had not these lived, we should not
have had Kant and his successors.  Other philosophies we should
undoubtedly have had, for the busy mind of man must produce something.
But whatever glimpses at the truth these men have vouchsafed us have
been guaranteed by the order of development in which they have stood.
They could not independently have written the books that have come down
to us.

This should be evident from what has been said earlier in this chapter
and elsewhere in this book.  Let us bear in mind that a philosopher
draws his material from two sources.  First of all, he has the
experience of the mind and the world which is the common property of us
all.  But it is, as we have seen, by no means easy to use this
material.  It is vastly difficult to reflect.  It is fatally easy to
misconceive what presents itself in our experience.  With the most
earnest effort to describe what lies before us, we give a false
description, and we mislead ourselves and others.

In the second place, the philosopher has the interpretations of
experience which he has inherited from his predecessors.  The influence
of these is enormous.  Each age has, to a large extent, its problems
already formulated or half formulated for it.  Every man must have
ancestors, of some sort, if he is to appear upon this earthly stage at
all; and a wholly independent philosopher is as impossible a creature
as an ancestorless man.  We have seen how Descartes (section 60) tried
to repudiate his debt to the past, and how little successful he was in
doing so.

Now, we make a mistake if we overlook the genius of the individual
thinker.  The history of speculative thought has many times taken a
turn which can only be accounted for by taking into consideration the
genius for reflective thought possessed by some great mind.  In the
crucible of such an intellect, old truths take on a new aspect,
familiar facts acquire a new and a richer meaning.  But we also make a
mistake if we fail to see in the writings of such a man one of the
stages which has been reached in the gradual evolution of human
thought, if we fail to realize that each philosophy is to a great
extent the product of the past.

When one comes to understand these things, the history of philosophy no
longer presents itself as a mere agglomeration of arbitrary and
independent systems.  And an attentive reading gives us a further key
to the interpretation of what seemed inexplicable.  We find that there
may be distinct and different streams of thought, which, for a while,
run parallel without commingling their waters.  For centuries the
Epicurean followed his own tradition, and walked in the footsteps of
his own master.  The Stoic was of sterner stuff, and he chose to travel
another path.  To this day there are adherents of the old church
philosophy, Neo-Scholastics, whose ways of thinking can only be
understood when we have some knowledge of Aristotle and of his
influence upon men during the Middle Ages.  We ourselves may be
Kantians or Hegelians, and the man at our elbow may recognize as his
spiritual father Comte or Spencer.

It does not follow that, because one system follows another in
chronological order, it is its lineal descendant.  But some ancestor a
system always has, and if we have the requisite learning and ingenuity,
we need not find it impossible to explain why this thinker or that was
influenced to give his thought the peculiar turn that characterizes it.
Sometimes many influences have conspired to attain the result, and it
is no small pleasure to address oneself to the task of disentangling
the threads which enter into the fabric.

Moreover, as we read thus with discrimination, we begin to see that the
great men of the past have not spoken without appearing to have
sufficient reason for their utterances in the light of the times in
which they lived.  We may make it a rule that, when they seem to be
speaking arbitrarily, to be laying before us reasonings that are not
reasonings, dogmas for which no excuse seems to be offered, the fault
lies in our lack of comprehension.  Until we can understand how a man,
living in a certain century, and breathing a certain moral and
intellectual atmosphere, could have said what he did, we should assume
that we have read his words, but not his real thought.  For the latter
there is always a psychological, if not a logical, justification.

And this brings me to the question of the language in which the
philosophers have expressed their thoughts.  The more attentively one
reads the history of philosophy, the clearer it becomes that the number
of problems with which the philosophers have occupied themselves is not
overwhelmingly great.  If each philosophy which confronts us seems to
us quite new and strange, it is because we have not arrived at the
stage at which it is possible for us to recognize old friends with new
faces.  The same old problems, the problems which must ever present
themselves to reflective thought, recur again and again.  The form is
more or less changed, and the answers which are given to them are not,
of course, always the same.  Each age expresses itself in a somewhat
different way.  But sometimes the solution proposed for a given problem
is almost the same in substance, even when the two thinkers we are
contrasting belong to centuries which lie far apart.  In this case,
only our own inability to strip off the husk and reach the fruit itself
prevents us from seeing that we have before us nothing really new.

Thus, if we read the history of philosophy with patience and with
discrimination, it grows luminous.  We come to feel nearer to the men
of the past.  We see that we may learn from their successes and from
their failures; and if we are capable of drawing a moral at all, we
apply the lesson to ourselves.




CHAPTER XXIV

SOME PRACTICAL ADMONITIONS

88. BE PREPARED TO ENTER UPON A NEW WAY OF LOOKING AT THINGS.--We have
seen that reflective thought tries to analyze experience and to attain
to a clear view of the elements that make it up--to realize vividly
what is the very texture of the known world, and what is the nature of
knowledge.  It is possible to live to old age, as many do, without even
a suspicion that there may be such a knowledge as this, and
nevertheless to possess a large measure of rather vague but very
serviceable information about both minds and bodies.

It is something of a shock to learn that a multitude of questions may
be asked touching the most familiar things in our experience, and that
our comprehension of those things may be so vague that we grope in vain
for an answer.  Space, time, matter, minds, realities,--with these
things we have to do every day.  Can it be that we do not know what
they are?  Then we must be blind, indeed.  How shall we set about
enlightening our ignorance?

Not as we have enlightened our ignorance heretofore.  We have added
fact to fact; but our task now is to gain a new light on all facts, to
see them from a different point of view; not so much to extend our
knowledge as to deepen it.

It seems scarcely necessary to point out that our world, when looked at
for the first time in this new way, may seem to be a new and strange
world.  The real things of our experience may appear to melt away, to
be dissolved by reflection into mere shadows and unrealities.  Well do
I remember the consternation with which, when almost a schoolboy, I
first made my acquaintance with John Stuart Mill's doctrine that the
things about us are "permanent possibilities of sensation."  To Mill,
of course, chairs and tables were still chairs and tables, but to me
they became ghosts, inhabitants of a phantom world, to find oneself in
which was a matter of the gravest concern.

I suspect that this sense of the unreality of things comes often to
those who have entered upon the path of reflection, It may be a comfort
to such to realize that it is rather a thing to be expected.  How can
one feel at home in a world which one has entered for the first time?
One cannot become a philosopher and remain exactly the man that one was
before.  Men have tried to do it,--Thomas Reid is a notable instance
(section 50); but the result is that one simply does not become a
philosopher.  It is not possible to gain a new and a deeper insight
into the nature of things, and yet to see things just as one saw them
before one attained to this.

If, then, we are willing to study philosophy at all, we must be willing
to embrace new views of the world, if there seem to be good reasons for
so doing.  And if at first we suffer from a sense of bewilderment, we
must have patience, and must wait to see whether time and practice may
not do something toward removing our distress.  It may be that we have
only half understood what has been revealed to us.

89. BE WILLING TO CONSIDER POSSIBILITIES WHICH AT FIRST STRIKE ONE AS
ABSURD.--It must be confessed that the philosophers have sometimes
brought forward doctrines which seem repellent to good sense, and
little in harmony with the experience of the world which we have all
our lives enjoyed.  Shall we on this account turn our backs upon them
and refuse them an impartial hearing?

Thus, the idealist maintains that there is no existence save psychical
existence; that the material things about us are really mental things.
One of the forms taken by this doctrine is that alluded to above, that
things are permanent possibilities of sensation.

I think it can hardly be denied that this sounds out of harmony with
the common opinion of mankind.  Men do not hesitate to distinguish
between minds and material things, nor do they believe that material
things exist only in minds.  That dreams and hallucinations exist only
in minds they are very willing to admit; but they will not admit that
this is true of such things as real chairs and tables.  And if we ask
them why they take such a position, they fall back upon what seems
given in experience.

Now, as the reader of the earlier chapters has seen, I think that the
plain man is more nearly right in his opinion touching the existence of
a world of non-mental things than is the idealistic philosopher.  The
latter has seen a truth and misconceived it, thus losing some truth
that he had before he began to reflect.  The former has not seen the
truth which has impressed the idealist, and he has held on to that
vague recognition that there are two orders of things given in our
experience, the physical and the mental, which seems to us so
unmistakable a fact until we fall into the hands of the philosophers.

But all this does not prove that we have a right simply to fall back
upon "common sense," and refuse to listen to the idealist.  The
deliverances of unreflective common sense are vague in the extreme; and
though it may seem to assure us that there is a world of things
non-mental, its account of that world is confused and incoherent.  He
who must depend on common sense alone can find no answer to the
idealists; he refuses to follow them, but he cannot refute them.  He is
reduced to dogmatic denial.

This is in itself an uncomfortable position.  And when we add to this
the reflection that such a man loses the truth which the idealist
emphasizes, the truth that the external world of which we speak must
be, if we are to know it at all, a world revealed to our senses, a
world given in our experience, we see that he who stops his ears
remains in ignorance.  The fact is that the man who has never weighed
the evidence that impresses the idealist is not able to see clearly
what is meant by that external world in which we all incline to put
such faith.  We may say that he _feels_ a truth blindly, but does not
see it.

Let us take another illustration.  If there is one thing that we feel
to be as sure as the existence of the external world, it is that there
are other minds more or less resembling our own.  The solipsist may try
to persuade us that the evidence for such minds is untrustworthy.  We
may see no flaw in his argument, but he cannot convince us.  May we
ignore him, and refuse to consider the matter at all?

Surely not, if we wish to substitute clear thinking for vague and
indefinite opinion.  We should listen with attention, strive to
understand all the reasonings laid before us, and then, if they seem to
lead to conclusions really not in harmony with our experience, go
carefully over the ground and try to discover the flaw in them.  It is
only by doing something like this that we can come to see clearly what
is meant when we speak of two or more minds and the relation between
them.  The solipsist can help us, and we should let him do it.

We should, therefore, be willing to consider seriously all sorts of
doctrines which may at first strike us as unreasonable.  I have chosen
two which I believe to contain error.  But the man who approaches a
doctrine which impresses him as strange has no right to assume at the
outset that it contains error.  We have seen again and again how easy
it is to misapprehend what is given in experience.  The philosopher may
be in the right, and what he says may repel us because we have become
accustomed to certain erroneous notions, and they have come to seem
self-evident truths.

90. DO NOT HAVE TOO MUCH RESPECT FOR AUTHORITY.--But if it is an error
to refuse to listen to the philosopher, it is surely no less an error
to accord him an authority above what he has a right to demand.  Bear
in mind what was said in the last chapter about the difference between
the special sciences and philosophy.  There is in the latter field no
body of doctrine that we may justly regard as authoritative.  There are
"schools" of philosophy, and their adherents fall into the very human
error of feeling very sure that they and those who agree with them are
right; and the emphasis with which they speak is apt to mislead those
who are not well informed.  I shall say a few words about the dangers
of the "school."

If we look about us, we are impressed by the fact that there are
"schools" of philosophy, somewhat as there are religious sects and
political parties.  An impressive teacher sets the mark of his
personality and of his preferences upon those who come under his
influence.  They are not at an age to be very critical, and, indeed,
they have not as yet the requisite learning to enable them to be
critical.  They keep the trend which has been given them early in life,
and, when they become teachers, they pass on the type of thought with
which they have been inoculated, and the circle widens.  "Schools" may
arise, of course, in a different way.  An epoch-making book may sweep
men off of their feet and make of them passionate adherents.  But he
who has watched the development of the American universities during the
last twenty-five years must be impressed with the enormous influence
which certain teachers have had in giving a direction to the
philosophic thought of those who have come in contact with them.  We
expect the pupils of a given master to have a given shade of opinion,
and very often we are not disappointed in our guess.

It is entirely natural that this should be so.  Those who betake
themselves to the study of philosophy are men like other men.  They
have the same feelings, and the bending of the twig has the same
significance in their case that it has in that of others.  It is no
small compliment to a teacher that he can thus spread his influence,
and leave his proxies even when he passes away.

But, when we strive to "put off humanity" and to look at the whole
matter under the cold light of reason, we may well ask ourselves,
whether he who unconsciously accepts his philosophy, in whole or in
part, because it has been the philosophy of his teacher, is not doing
what is done by those persons whose politics and whose religion take
their color from such accidental circumstances as birth in a given
class or family traditions?

I am far from saying that it is, in general, a bad thing for the world
that men should be influenced in this way by one another.  I say only
that, when we look at the facts of the case, we must admit that even
our teachers of philosophy do not always become representatives of the
peculiar type of thought for which they stand, merely through a
deliberate choice from the wealth of material which the history of
speculative thought lays before them.  They are influenced by others to
take what they do take, and the traces of this influence are apt to
remain with them through life.  He who wishes to be entirely impartial
must be on his guard against such influences as these, and must
distrust prejudices for or against certain doctrines, when he finds
that he imbibed them at an uncritical age and has remained under their
influence ever since.  Some do appear to be able to emancipate
themselves, and to outgrow what they first learned.

It is, as I have said, natural that there should be a tendency to form
"schools" in philosophy.  And there are certain things that make this
somewhat uncritical acceptance of a doctrine very attractive.

In the first place, if we are willing to take a system of any sort as a
whole, it saves us a vast amount of trouble.  We seem to have a
citadel, a point of vantage from which we can look out upon life and
interpret it.  If the house we live in is not in all respects ideal, at
least it is a house, and we are not homeless.  There is nothing more
intolerable to most men than the having of no opinions.  They will
change one opinion for another, but they will rarely consent to do
without altogether.  It is something to have an answer to offer to
those who persist in asking questions; and it is something to have some
sort of ground under one's feet, even if it be not very solid ground.

Again.  Man is a social creature, and he is greatly fortified in his
opinions by the consciousness that others share them with him.  If we
become adherents of a "school," we have the agreeable consciousness
that we are not walking alone through the maze of speculations that
confronts those who reflect.  There appears to be a traveled way in
which we may have some confidence.  Are we not following the crowd, or,
at least, a goodly number of the pilgrims who are seeking the same goal
with ourselves?  Under such circumstances we are not so often impelled
to inquire anxiously whether we are after all upon the right road.  We
assume that we have made no mistake.

Under such circumstances we are apt to forget that there are many such
roads, and that these have been traveled in ages past by troops very
much like our own, who also cherished the hope that they were upon the
one and only highway.  In other words, we are apt to forget the lesson
of the history of philosophy.  This is a serious mistake.

And what intensifies our danger, if we belong to a school which happens
to be dominant and to have active representatives, is that we get very
little real criticism.  The books that we write are usually criticised
by those who view our positions sympathetically, and who are more
inclined to praise than to blame.  He who looks back upon the past is
struck with the fact that books which have been lauded to the skies in
one age have often been subjected to searching criticism and to a good
deal of condemnation in the next.  Something very like this is to be
expected of books written in our own time.  It is, however, a pity that
we should have to wait so long for impartial criticism.

This leads me to say a word of the reviews which fill our philosophical
journals, and which we must read, for it is impossible to read all the
books that come out, and yet we wish to know something about them.

To the novice it is something of a surprise to find that books by men
whom he knows to be eminent for their ingenuity and their learning are
condemned in very offhand fashion by quite young men, who as yet have
attained to little learning and to no eminence at all.  One sometimes
is tempted to wonder that men admittedly remarkable should have
fathered such poor productions as we are given to understand them to
be, and should have offered them to a public that has a right to be
indignant.

Now, there can be no doubt that, in philosophy, a cat has the right to
look at a king, and has also a right to point out his misdoings, if
such there be.  But it seems just to indicate that, in this matter,
certain cautions should be observed.

If a great man has been guilty of an error in reasoning, there is no
reason why it should not be pointed out by any one who is capable of
detecting it.  The authority of the critic is a matter of no moment
where the evidence is given.  In such a case, we take a suggestion and
we do the criticising for ourselves.  But where the evidence is not
given, where the justice of the criticism is not proved, the case is
different.  Here we must take into consideration the authority of the
critic, and, if we follow him at all, we must follow him blindly.  Is
it safe to do this?

It is never safe in philosophy, or, at any rate, it is safe so seldom
that the exceptions are not worth taking into account.  Men write from
the standpoint of some school of opinion; and, until we know their
prepossessions, their statements that this is good, that is bad, the
third thing is profound, are of no significance whatever.  We should
simply set them aside, and try to find out from our reviewer what is
contained in the book under criticism.

One of the evils arising out of the bias I am discussing is, that books
and authors are praised or condemned indiscriminately because of their
point of view, and little discrimination is made between good books and
poor books.  There is all the difference in the world between a work
which can be condemned only on the ground that it is realistic or
idealistic in its standpoint, and those feeble productions which are to
be condemned from every point of view.  If we consistently carry out
the principle that we may condemn all those who are not of our party,
we must give short shrift to a majority of the great men of the past.

So I say, beware of authority in philosophy, and, above all, beware of
that most insidious form of authority, the spirit of the "school."  It
cannot but narrow our sympathies and restrict our outlook.

91. REMEMBER THAT ORDINARY RULES OF EVIDENCE APPLY.--What I am going to
say in this section is closely related to what has been said just
above.  To the disinterested observer it may seem rather amusing that
one should think it worth while to try to show that we have not the
right to use a special set of weights and measures when we are dealing
with things philosophical.  There was a time when men held that a given
doctrine could be philosophically false, and, at the same time,
theologically true; but surely the day of such twists and turnings is
past!

I am by no means sure that it is past.  With the lapse of time, old
doctrines take on new aspects, and come to be couched in a language
that suits the temper of the later age.  Sometimes the doctrine is
veiled and rendered less startling, but remains essentially what it was
before, and may be criticised in much the same way.

I suppose we may say that every one who is animated by the party spirit
discussed above, and who holds to a group of philosophical tenets with
a warmth of conviction out of proportion to the authority of the actual
evidence which may be claimed for them, is tacitly assuming that the
truth or falsity of philosophical dogmas is not wholly a matter of
evidence, but that the desires of the philosopher may also be taken
into account.

This position is often taken unconsciously.  Thus, when, instead of
proving to others that a given doctrine is false, we try to show them
that it is a dangerous doctrine, and leads to unpalatable consequences,
we assume that what seems distasteful cannot be true, and we count on
the fact that men incline to believe what they like to believe.

May we give this position the dignity of a philosophical doctrine and
hold that, in the somewhat nebulous realm inhabited by the philosopher,
men are not bound by the same rules of evidence that obtain elsewhere?
That this is actually done, those who read much in the field of modern
philosophy are well aware.  Several excellent writers have maintained
that we need not, even if there seems to be evidence for them, accept
views of the universe which do not satisfy "our whole nature."

We should not confuse with this position the very different one which
maintains that we have a right to hold tentatively, and with a
willingness to abandon them should evidence against them be
forthcoming, views which we are not able completely to establish, but
which seem reasonable.  One may do this with perfect sincerity, and
without holding that philosophical truth is in any way different from
scientific truth.  But the other position goes beyond this; it assumes
that man must be satisfied, and that only that can be true which
satisfies him.

I ask, is it not significant that such an assumption should be made
only in the realm of the unverifiable?  No man dreams of maintaining
that the rise and fall of stocks will be such as to satisfy the whole
nature even of the elect, or that the future history of man on this
planet is a thing to be determined by some philosopher who decides for
us what would or would not be desirable.

Surely all truths of election--those truths that we simply choose to
have true--are something much less august than that Truth of Evidence
which sometimes seems little to fall in with our desires, and in the
face of which we are humble listeners, not dictators.  Before the
latter we are modest; we obey, lest we be confounded.  And if, in the
philosophic realm, we believe that we may order Truth about, and make
her our slave, is it not because we have a secret consciousness that we
are not dealing with Truth at all, but with Opinion, and with Opinion
that has grown insolent because she cannot be drawn from her obscurity
and be shown to be what she is?

Sometimes it is suddenly revealed to a man that he has been accepting
two orders of truth.  I once walked and talked with a good scholar who
discoursed of high themes and defended warmly certain theses.  I said
to him: If you could go into the house opposite, and discover
unmistakably whether you are in the right or in the wrong,--discover it
as unmistakably as you can discover whether there is or is not
furniture in the drawing-room,--would you go?  He thought over the
matter for a while, and then answered frankly; No! I should not go; I
should stay out here and argue it out.

92. AIM AT CLEARNESS AND SIMPLICITY.--There is no department of
investigation in which it is not desirable to cultivate clearness and
simplicity in thinking, speaking, and writing.  But there are certain
reasons why we should be especially on our guard in philosophy against
the danger of employing a tongue "not understanded of the people."
There are dangerous pitfalls concealed under the use of technical words
and phrases.

The value of technical expressions in the special sciences must be
conceded.  They are supposed to be more exact and less ambiguous than
terms in ordinary use, and they mark an advance in our knowledge of the
subject.  The distinctions which they indicate have been carefully
drawn, and appear to be of such authority that they should be generally
accepted.  Sometimes, as, for example, in mathematics, a conventional
set of symbols may quite usurp the function of ordinary language, and
may enormously curtail the labor of setting forth the processes and
results of investigation.

But we must never forget that we have not in philosophy an
authoritative body of truth which we have the right to impose upon all
who enter that field.  A multitude of distinctions have been made and
are made; but the representatives of different schools of thought are
not at one touching the value and significance of these distinctions.
If we coin a word or a phrase to mark such, there is some danger that
we fall into the habit of using such words or phrases, as we use the
coins in our purse, without closely examining them, and with the ready
assumption that they must pass current everywhere.

Thus, there is always a possibility that our technical expressions may
be nothing less than crystallized error.  Against this we should surely
be on our guard.

Again.  When we translate the language of common life into the dialect
of the learned, there is danger that we may fall into the error of
supposing that we are adding to our knowledge, even though we are doing
nothing save to exchange one set of words for another.  Thus, we all
know very well that one mind can communicate with another.  One does
not have to be a scholar to be aware of this.  If we choose to call
this "intersubjective intercourse," we have given the thing a sounding
name; but we know no more about it than we did before.  The problem of
the relation between minds, and the way in which they are to be
conceived as influencing each other, remains just what it was.  So,
also, we recognize the everyday fact that we know both ourselves and
what is not ourselves.  Shall we call this knowledge of something not
ourselves "self-transcendence"?  We may do so if we wish, but we ought
to realize that this bestowal of a title makes no whit clearer what is
meant by knowledge.

Unhappily, men too often believe that, when they have come into the
possession of a new word or phrase, they have gained a new thought.
The danger is great in proportion to the breadth of the gulf which
separates the new dialect from the old language of common life in which
we are accustomed to estimate things.  Many a philosopher would be
bereft, indeed, were he robbed of his vocabulary and compelled to
express his thoughts in ordinary speech.  The theories which are
implicit in certain recurring expressions would be forced to come out
into the open, and stand criticism without disguise.

But can one write philosophical books without using words which are not
in common use among the unphilosophic?  I doubt it.  Some such words it
seems impossible to avoid.  However, it does seem possible to bear in
mind the dangers of a special philosophical terminology and to reduce
such words to a minimum.

Finally, we may appeal to the humanity of the philosopher.  The path to
reflection is a sufficiently difficult one as it is; why should he roll
rocks upon it and compel those who come after him to climb over them?
If truths are no truer for being expressed in a repellent form, why
should he trick them out in a fantastic garb?  What we want is the
naked truth, and we lose time and patience in freeing our mummy from
the wrappings in which learned men have seen fit to encase it.

93. DO NOT HASTILY ACCEPT A DOCTRINE.--This brings me to the last of
the maxims which I urge upon the attention of the reader.  All that has
been said so far may be regarded as leading up to it.

The difficulty that confronts us is this: On the one hand, we must
recognize the uncertainty that reigns in this field of investigation.
We must ever weigh probabilities and possibilities; we do not find
ourselves in the presence of indubitable truths which all competent
persons stand ready to admit.  This seems to argue that we should learn
to suspend judgment, and should be most wary in our acceptance of one
philosophical doctrine and our rejection of another.

On the other hand, philosophy is not a mere matter of intellectual
curiosity.  It has an intimate connection with life.  As a man thinks,
so is he, to a great extent, at least.  How, then, can one afford to
remain critical and negative?  To counsel this seems equivalent to
advising that one abandon the helm and consent to float at the mercy of
wind and tide.

The difficulty is a very real one.  It presents itself insistently to
those who have attained to that degree of intellectual development at
which one begins to ask oneself questions and to reflect upon the worth
and meaning of life.  An unreflective adherence to tradition no longer
satisfies such persons.  They wish to know why they should believe in
this or that doctrine, and why they should rule their lives in harmony
with this or that maxim.  Shall we advise them to lay hold without
delay of a set of philosophical tenets, as we might advise a disabled
man to aid himself with any staff that happens to come to hand?  Or
shall we urge them to close their eyes to the light, and to go back
again to the old unreflective life?

Neither of these counsels seems satisfactory, for both assume tacitly
that it does not much matter what the _truth_ is, and that we can
afford to disregard it.

Perhaps we may take a suggestion from that prudent man and acute
philosopher, Descartes.  Discontented with the teachings of the schools
as they had been presented to him, he resolved to set out upon an
independent voyage of discovery, and to look for a philosophy of his
own.  It seemed necessary to him to doubt, provisionally at least, all
that he had received from the past.  But in what house should he live
while he was reconstructing his old habitation?  Without principles of
some sort he could not live, and without reasonable principles he could
not live well.  So he framed a set of provisional rules, which should
guide his life until he had new ground beneath his feet.

When we examine these rules, we find that, on the whole, they are such
as the experience of mankind has found prudent and serviceable.  In
other words, we discover that Descartes, until he was in a position to
see clearly for himself, was willing to be led by others.  He was a
unit in the social order, and he recognized that truth.

It does not seem out of place to recall this fact to the consciousness
of those who are entering upon the reflective life.  Those who are
rather new to reflection upon philosophical matters are apt to seize
single truths, which are too often half-truths, and to deduce their
consequences remorselessly.  They do not always realize the extreme
complexity of society, or see the full meaning of the relations in
which they stand to the state and to the church.  Breadth of view can
only come with an increase of knowledge and with the exercise of
reflection.

For this reason I advise patience, and a willingness to accept the
established order of things until one is very sure that one has
attained to some truth--some real truth, not a mere truth of
election--which may serve as the basis of a reconstruction.  The first
glimpses of truth cannot be depended upon to furnish such a foundation.

Thus, we may suspend judgment, and, nevertheless, be ready to act.  But
is not this a mere compromise?  Certainly.  All life is a compromise;
and in the present instance it means only that we should keep our eyes
open to the light, whatever its source, and yet should nourish that
wholesome self-distrust that prevents a man from being an erratic and
revolutionary creature, unmindful of his own limitations.  Prudent men
in all walks in life make this compromise, and the world is the better
for it.




NOTES


CHAPTER I, sections 1-5.  If the student will take a good history of
philosophy, and look over the accounts of the different systems
referred to, he will see the justice of the position taken in the text,
namely, that philosophy was formerly synonymous with universal
knowledge.  It is not necessary, of course, to read the whole history
of philosophy to attain this end.  One may take such a text-book as
Ueberweg's "History of Philosophy," and run over the summaries
contained in the large print.  To see how the conception of what
constitutes universal knowledge changed in successive ages, compare
Thales, the Sophists, Aristotle, the Schoolmen, Bacon, and Descartes.
For the ancient philosophy one may consult Windelband's "History of the
Ancient Philosophy," a clear and entertaining little work (English
translation, N.Y., 1899).

In Professor Paulsen's "Introduction to Philosophy" (English
translation, N.Y., 1895), there is an interesting introductory chapter
on "The Nature and Import of Philosophy" (pp. 1-41).  The author pleads
for the old notion of philosophy as universal knowledge, though he does
not, of course, mean that the philosopher must be familiar with all the
details of all the sciences.

Section 6.  In justification of the meaning given to the word
"philosophy" in this section, I ask the reader to look over the list of
courses in philosophy advertised in the catalogues of our leading
universities at home and abroad.  There is a certain consensus of
opinion as to what properly comes under the title, even among those who
differ widely as to what is the proper definition of philosophy.


CHAPTER II, sections 7-10.  Read the chapter on "The Mind and the World
in Common Thought and in Science" (Chapter I) in my "System of
Metaphysics," N.Y., 1904.

One can be brought to a vivid realization of the fact that the sciences
proceed upon a basis of assumptions which they do not attempt to
analyze and justify, if one will take some elementary work on
arithmetic or geometry or psychology and examine the first few
chapters, bearing in mind what philosophical problems may be drawn from
the materials there treated.  Section 11.  The task of reflective
thought and its difficulties are treated in the chapter entitled "How
Things are Given in Consciousness" (Chapter III), in my "System of
Metaphysics."


CHAPTER III, sections 12-13.  Read "The Inadequacy of the Psychological
Standpoint," "System of Metaphysics," Chapter II.  I call especial
attention to the illustration of "the man in the cell" (pp. 18 ff.).
It would be a good thing to read these pages with the class, and to
impress upon the students the fact that those who have doubted or
denied the existence of the external material world have, if they have
fallen into error, fallen into a very natural error, and are not
without some excuse.

Section 14.  See "The Metaphysics of the Telephone Exchange," "System
of Metaphysics," Chapter XXII, where Professor Pearson's doctrine is
examined at length, with quotations and references.

It is interesting to notice that a doubt of the external world has
always rested upon some sort of a "telephone exchange" argument;
naturally, it could not pass by that name before the invention of the
telephone, but the reasoning is the same.  It puts the world at one
remove, shutting the mind up to the circle of its ideas; and then it
doubts or denies the world, or, at least, holds that its existence must
be proved in some roundabout way.  Compare Descartes, "Of the Existence
of Material Things," "Meditations," VI.


CHAPTER IV, sections 15-18.  See Chapters VI and VII, "What we mean by
the External World," and "Sensations and 'Things,'" in my "System of
Metaphysics."  In that work the discussion of the distinction between
the objective order of experience and the subjective order is completed
in Chapter XXIII, "The Distinction between the World and the Mind."
This was done that the subjective order might be treated in the part of
the book which discusses the mind and its relation to matter.

As it is possible that the reader may be puzzled by differences of
expression which obtain in the two books, a word of explanation is not
out of place.

In the "Metaphysics," for example, it is said that sensations so
connect themselves together as to form what we call the system of
material things (p. 105).  It is intimated in a footnote that this is a
provisional statement and the reader is referred to later chapters.
Now, in the present book (sections 16-17), it is taught that we may not
call material things groups of sensations.

The apparent contradiction is due to the fact that, in this volume, the
full meaning of the word "sensation" is exhibited at the outset, and
sensations, as phenomena of the subjective order, are distinguished
from the phenomena of the objective order which constitute the external
world.  In the earlier work the word "sensation" was for a while used
loosely to cover all our experiences that do not belong to the class
called imaginary, and the distinction between the subjective and
objective in this realm was drawn later (Chapter XXIII).

I think the present arrangement is the better one, as it avoids from
the outset the suggestion that the real world is something
subjective--our sensations or ideas--and thus escapes the idealistic
flavor which almost inevitably attaches to the other treatment, until
the discussion is completed, at least.


CHAPTER V, sections 10-21.  See Chapters VIII and IX, "System of
Metaphysics," "The Distinction between Appearance and Reality" and "The
Significance of the Distinction."

Section 22.  See Chapter XXVI, "The World as Unperceived, and the
'Unknowable,'" where Spencer's doctrine is examined at length, and
references are given.  I think it is very important that the student
should realize that the "Unknowable" is a perfectly useless assumption
in philosophy, and can serve no purpose whatever.


CHAPTER VI, sections 23-25.  See Chapters X and XI, "System of
Metaphysics," "The Kantian Doctrine of Space" and "Difficulties
connected with the Kantian Doctrine of Space."

It would be an excellent thing for the student, after he has read the
above chapters, to take up Kant's "Critique of Pure Reason," and read
and analyze the argument of Antinomies I and II, with the Observations
appended.  One can understand these arguments without being familiar
with the "Critique" as a whole; at any rate, the account of Kant's
philosophy contained in section 51 of this book will serve to explain
his use of certain terms, such as "the laws of our sensibility."

Kant's reasonings are very curious and interesting in this part of his
book.  It seems to be proved that the world must be endless in space
and without a beginning or end in time, and just as plausibly proved
that it cannot be either.  It seems to be proved that finite spaces and
times are infinitely divisible, and at the same time that they cannot
be infinitely divisible.  The situation is an amusing one, and rendered
not the less amusing by the seriousness with which the mutually
destructive arguments are taken.

When the student meets such a tangle in the writings of any
philosopher, I ask him to believe that it is not the human reason that
is at fault--at least, let him not assume that it is.  The fault
probably lies with a human reason.

Section 26.  See Chapter XII, "The Berkeleian Doctrine of Space," in my
"System of Metaphysics."  The argument ought not to be difficult to one
who has mastered Chapter V of this volume.


CHAPTER VII, sections 27-29.  Compare Chapter XIII, "System of
Metaphysics," "Of Time."

With the chapters on Space and Time it would be well for the student to
read Chapter XIV, "The Real World in Space and Time," where it is made
clear why we have no hesitation in declaring space and time to be
infinite, although we recognize that it seems to be an assumption of
knowledge to declare the material world infinite.


CHAPTER VIII, sections 30-32.  Read, in the "System of Metaphysics,"
Chapters V and XVII, "The Self or Knower" and "The Atomic Self."

Section 33.  The suggestions, touching the attitude of the psychologist
toward the mind, contained in the preface to Professor William James's
"Psychology" are very interesting and instructive.


CHAPTER IX, sections 35-36.  For a strong argument in favor of
interactionism see James's "Psychology," Chapter V.  I wish the student
would, in reading it, bear in mind what is said in my chapter on "The
Atomic Self," above referred to.  The subject should be approached with
an open mind, and one should suspend judgment until both sides have
been heard from.

Section 37.  Descartes held that the lower animals are automata and
that their actions are not indicative of consciousness; he regarded
their bodies as machines lacking the soul in the "little pineal gland."
Professor Huxley revived the doctrine of animal automatism and extended
it so as to include man.  He regarded consciousness as a "collateral
product" of the working of the body, related to it somewhat as is the
steam-whistle of a locomotive engine to the working of the machine.  He
made it an effect, but not a cause, of motions.  See "System of
Metaphysics," Chapter XVIII, "The Automaton Theory: its Genesis."

We owe the doctrine of parallelism, in its original form, to Spinoza.
It was elaborated by W. K. Clifford, and to him the modern interest in
the subject is largely due.  The whole subject is discussed at length
in my "System of Metaphysics," Chapters XIX-XXI.  The titles are: "The
Automaton Theory: Parallelism," "What is Parallelism?" and "The Man and
the Candlestick."  Clifford's doctrine is presented in a new form in
Professor Strong's recent brilliant work, "Why the Mind has a Body"
N.Y., 1903.

Section 38.  See "System of Metaphysics," Chapter XXIV, "The Time and
Place of Sensations and Ideas."


CHAPTER X, sections 40-42.  See "System of Metaphysics," Chapters XXVII
and XXVIII, "The Existence of Other Minds," and "The Distribution of
Minds."

Writers seem to be divided into three camps on this question of other
minds.

(1) I have treated our knowledge of other minds as due to an inference.
This is the position usually taken.

(2) We have seen that Huxley and Clifford cast doubts upon the validity
of the inference, but, nevertheless, made it.  Professor Strong, in the
work mentioned in the notes to the previous chapter, maintains that it
is not an inference, and that we do not directly perceive other minds,
but that we are assured of their existence just the same.  He makes our
knowledge an "intuition" in the old-fashioned sense of the word, a
something to be accepted but not to be accounted for.

(3) Writers who have been influenced more or less by the Neo-Kantian or
Neo-Hegelian doctrine are apt to speak as though we had the same direct
evidence of the existence of other minds that we have of the existence
of our own.  I have never seen a systematic and detailed exposition of
this doctrine.  It appears rather in the form of hints dropped in
passing.  A number of such are to be found in Taylor's "Elements of
Metaphysics."

Section 43. The "Mind-stuff" doctrine is examined at length and its
origin discussed in Chapter XXXI of the "System of Metaphysics,"
"Mental Phenomena and the Causal Nexus."  It is well worth while for
the student to read the whole of Clifford's essay "On the Nature of
Things-in-themselves," even if he is pressed for time.


CHAPTER XI, section 44.  See "System of Metaphysics," Chapter XV, "The
World as Mechanism."

Section 45.  See Chapter XXXI, "The Place of Mind in Nature."

Section 46.  For a definition of Fatalism, and a description of its
difference from the scientific doctrine of Determinism, see Chapter
XXXIII, "Fatalism, 'Freewill' and Determinism."  For a vigorous defense
of "Freewill" (which is not, in my opinion, free will at all, in the
common acceptation of the word) see Professor James's Essay on "The
Dilemma of the Determinist," in his volume, "The Will to Believe."

Fatalism and Determinism are constantly confused, and much of the
opposition to Determinism is attributable to this confusion.

Section 47.  See Chapter XXXII, "Mechanism and Teleology."


CHAPTER XII, section 48.  The notes to Chapter III (see above) are in
point here.  It is well worth the student's while to read the whole of
Chapter XI, Book IV, of Locke's "Essay."  It is entitled "Of our
Knowledge of the Existence of Other Things."  Notice the headings of
some of his sections:--

Section 1.  "It is to be had only by sensation."

Section 2.  "Instance whiteness of this paper."

Section 3.  "This, though not so certain as demonstration, yet may be
called 'Knowledge,' and proves the existence of things without us."

Locke's argument proceeds, as we have seen, on the assumption that we
perceive external things directly,--an assumption into which he slips
unawares,--and yet he cannot allow that we really do perceive directly
what is external.  This makes him uncomfortably conscious that he has
not absolute proof, after all.  The section that closes the discussion
is entitled: "Folly to expect demonstration in everything."

Section 49.  I wish that I could believe that every one of my readers
would sometime give himself the pleasure of reading through Berkeley's
"Principles of Human Knowledge" and his "Three Dialogues between Hylas
and Philonous."  Clearness of thought, beauty of style, and elevation
of sentiment characterize them throughout.

The "Principles" is a systematic treatise.  If one has not time to read
it all, one can get a good idea of the doctrine by running through the
first forty-one sections.  For brief readings in class, to illustrate
Berkeley's reasoning, one may take sections 1-3, 14, 18-20, and 38.

The "Dialogues" is a more popular work.  As the etymology of the names
in the title suggests, we have in it a dispute between a man who pins
his faith to matter and an idealist.  The aim of the book is to confute
skeptics and atheists from the standpoint of idealism.

For Hume's treatment of the external world, see his "Treatise of Human
Nature," Part IV, section 2.  For his treatment of the mind, see Part
IV, section 6.

Section 50.  Reid repeats himself a great deal, for he gives us
asseveration rather than proof.  One can get the gist of his argument
by reading carefully a few of his sections.  It would be a good
exercise to read in class, if time permitted, the two sections of his
"Inquiry" entitled "Of Extension" (Chapter V, section 5), and "Of
Perception in General" (Chapter VI, section 20).

Section 51.  For an account of the critical Philosophy, see
Falckenberg's "History of Modern Philosophy" (English translation,
N.Y., 1893).  Compare with this the accounts in the histories of
philosophy by Ueberweg and Höffding (English translation of the latter,
London, 1900).  Full bibliographies are to be found especially in
Ueberweg.

It is well to look at the philosophy of Kant through more than one pair
of eyes.  Thus, if one reads Morris's "Kant's Critique of Pure Reason"
(Chicago, 1882), one should read also Sidgwick's "Lectures on the
Philosophy of Kant" (N.Y., 1905).


CHAPTER XIII, section 52.  It is difficult to see how Hamilton could
regard himself as a "natural" realist (the word is employed by him).
See his "Lectures on Metaphysics," VIII, where he develops his
doctrine.  He seems to teach, in spite of himself, that we can know
directly only the impressions that things make on us, and must infer
all else: "Our whole knowledge of mind and matter is, thus, only
relative; of existence, absolutely and in itself, we know nothing."

Whom may we regard as representing the three kinds of "hypothetical
realism" described in the text?  Perhaps we may put the plain man, who
has not begun to reflect, in the first class.  John Locke is a good
representative of the second; see the "Essay concerning Human
Understanding," Book II, Chapter VIII.  Herbert Spencer belonged to the
third while he wrote Chapter V of his "First Principles of Philosophy."

Section 53.  I have said enough of the Berkeleian idealism in the notes
on Chapter XII.  As a good illustration of objective idealism in one of
its forms I may take the doctrine of Professor Royce; see his address,
"The Conception of God" (N.Y., 1902).

Mr. Bradley's doctrine is criticised in Chapter XXXIV (entitled "Of
God"), "System of Metaphysics."


CHAPTER XIV, section 55.  See "System of Metaphysics," Chapter XVI,
"The Insufficiency of Materialism."

Section 56.  Professor Strong's volume, "Why the Mind has a Body"
(N.Y., 1903), advocates a panpsychism much like that of Clifford.  It
is very clearly written, and with Clifford's essay on "The Nature of
Things-in-themselves," ought to give one a good idea of the
considerations that impel some able men to become panpsychists.

Section 57.  The pantheistic monism of Spinoza is of such importance
historically that it is desirable to obtain a clear notion of its
meaning.  I have discussed this at length in two earlier works: "The
Philosophy of Spinoza" (N.Y., 1894) and "On Spinozistic Immortality."
The student is referred to the account of Spinoza's "God or Substance"
contained in these.  See, especially, the "Introductory Note" in the
back of the first-mentioned volume.

Professor Royce is a good illustration of the idealistic monist; see
the volume referred to in the note above (section 53).  His "Absolute,"
or God, is conceived to be an all-inclusive mind of which our finite
minds are parts.

Section 58.  Sir William Hamilton's dualism is developed in his
"Lectures on Metaphysics," VIII.  He writes: "Mind and matter, as known
or knowable, are only two different series of phenomena or qualities;
as unknown and unknowable, they are the two substances in which these
two different series of phenomena or qualities are supposed to inhere.
The existence of an unknown substance is only an inference we are
compelled to make, from the existence of known phenomena; and the
distinction of two substances is only inferred from the seeming
incompatibility of the two series of phenomena to coinhere in one."


CHAPTER XV, section 60.  The reader will find Descartes's path traced
in the "Meditations."  In I, we have his sweeping doubt; in II, his
doctrine as to the mind; in III, the existence of God is established;
in VI, he gets around to the existence of the external world.  We find
a good deal of the "natural light" in the first part of his "Principles
of Philosophy."

Section 61.  We have an excellent illustration of Locke's inconsistency
in violating his own principles and going beyond experience, in his
treatment of "Substance."  Read, in his "Essay," Book I, Chapter IV,
section 18, and Book II, Chapter XXIII, section 4.  These sections are
not long, and might well be read and analyzed in class.

Section 62.  See the note to section 51.

Section 64.  I write this note (in 1908) to give the reader some idea
of later developments of the doctrine called pragmatism.  There has
been a vast amount printed upon the subject in the last two or three
years, but I am not able to say even yet that we have to do with "a
clear-cut doctrine, the limits and consequences of which have been
worked out in detail."  Hence, I prefer to leave section 64 as I first
wrote it, merely supplementing it here.

We may fairly consider the three leaders of the pragmatic movement to
be Professor William James, Dr. F. C. S. Schiller, and Professor John
Dewey.  The first has developed his doctrine at length in his volume
entitled "Pragmatism" (London, 1907); the second, who calls his
doctrine "Humanism," but declares himself a pragmatist, and in
essential agreement with Professor James, has published two volumes of
philosophical essays entitled "Humanism" (London, 1903) and "Studies in
Humanism" (London, 1907); the third has developed his position in the
first four chapters of the "Studies in Logical Theory" (Chicago, 1903).

Professor James, in his "Pragmatism" (Lecture II), says that
pragmatism, at the outset, at least, stands for no particular results.
It has no dogmas, and no doctrines save its method.  This method means:

"The attitude of looking away from first things, principles,
'categories,' supposed necessities; and of looking towards last things,
fruits, consequences, facts."  He remarks further, however, that
pragmatism has come to be used also in a wider sense, as signifying a
certain theory of truth (pp. 54-55).  This theory is brought forward in
Lecture VI.

The theory maintains that: "True ideas are those that we can
assimilate, validate, corroborate, and verify.  False ideas are those
that we can not" (p. 201).  This sounds as though Professor James
abandoned his doctrine touching the Turk and the Christian mentioned in
section 64.

But what do the words "verification" and "validation" pragmatically
mean?  We are told that they signify certain practical consequences of
the verified and validated idea.  Our ideas may be said to "agree" with
reality when they lead us, through acts and other ideas which they
instigate, up to or towards other parts of experience with which we
feel that the original ideas remain in agreement.  "The connections and
transitions come to us from point to point as being progressive,
harmonious, satisfactory.  This function of agreeable leading is what
we mean by an idea's verification" (p. 202).

Thus, we do not seem to be concerned with verification in the sense in
which the word has usually been employed heretofore.  The tendency to
take as true what is useful or serviceable has not been abandoned.
That Professor James does not really leave his Turk in the lurch
becomes clear to any one who will read his book attentively and note
his reasons for taking the various pragmatic attitudes which he does
take.  See, for example, his pragmatic argument for "free-will."  The
doctrine is simply assumed as a doctrine of "relief" (pp. 110-121).

Briefly stated, Dr. Schiller's doctrine is that truths are man-made,
and that it is right for man to consult his desires in making them.  It
is in substantial harmony with the pragmatism of Professor James, and I
shall not dwell upon it.  Dr. Schiller's essays are very entertainingly
written.

Professor Dewey's pragmatism seems to me sufficiently different from
the above to merit another title.  In the "Journal of Philosophy,
Psychology, and Scientific Methods," Volume IV, No. 4, Professor Dewey
brings out the distinction between his own position and that of
Professor James.

To the periodical literature on pragmatism I cannot refer in detail.
Professor James defends his position against misconceptions in the
"Philosophical Review," Volume XVII, No. 1.  See, on the other side,
Professor Perry, in the "Journal of Philosophy, Psychology, and
Scientific Methods," Volume IV, pp. 365 and 421; Professor Hibben,
"Philosophical Review," XVII, 4; and Dr. Carus, "The Monist," July,
1908.


CHAPTER XVI, sections 65-68.  To see how the logicians have regarded
their science and its relation to philosophy, see; Keynes's "Formal
Logic" (London, 1894), Introduction; Hobhouse's "Theory of Knowledge"
(London, 1896), Introduction; Aikins's "The Principles of Logic" (N.Y.,
1902), Introduction; and Creighton's "Introductory Logic" (N.Y., 1898),
Preface.

Professor Aikins writes: "Thus, in so far as logic tries to make us
reason correctly by giving us correct conceptions of things and the way
in which their relations involve each other, it is a kind of simple
metaphysics studied for a practical end."

Professor Creighton says, "Although in treating the syllogistic logic I
have followed to a large extent the ordinary mode of presentation, I
have both here, and when dealing with the inductive methods, endeavored
to interpret the traditional doctrines in a philosophical way, and to
prepare for the theoretical discussions of the third part of the book."

John Stuart Mill tried not to be metaphysical; but let the reader
examine, say, his third chapter, "Of the Things denoted by Names," or
look over Book VI, in his "System of Logic."

Professor Sigwart's great work, "Logik" (Freiburg, 2d edition, Volume
I, 1889, Volume II, 1893), may almost be called a philosophy of logic.


CHAPTER XVII, section 69.  Compare with Professor James's account of
the scope of psychology the following from Professor Baldwin: "The
question of the relation of psychology to metaphysics, over which a
fierce warfare has been waged in recent years, is now fairly settled by
the adjustment of mutual claims. . . .  The terms of the adjustment of
which I speak are briefly these: on the one hand, empirical
investigation must precede rational interpretation, and this empirical
investigation must be absolutely unhampered by fetters of dogmatism and
preconception; on the other hand, rational interpretation must be
equally free in its own province, since progress from the individual to
the general, from the detached fact to its universal meaning, can be
secured only by the judicious use of hypotheses, both metaphysical and
speculative.  Starting from the empirical we run out at every step into
the metempirical."  "Handbook of Psychology," Preface, pp. iii and iv.


CHAPTER XVIII, section 71.  The teacher might very profitably take
extracts from the two chapters of Whewell's "Elements of Morality"
referred to in the text, and read them with the class.  It is
significant of the weakness of Whewell's position that he can give us
advice as long as we do not need it, but, when we come to the
cross-roads, he is compelled to leave the matter to the individual
conscience, and gives us no hint of a general principle that may guide
us.

Section 72.  Wundt, in his volume "The Facts of the Moral Life" (N.Y.,
1897), tries to develop an empirical science of ethics independent of
metaphysics; see the Preface.

Compare with this: Martineau's "Types of Ethical Theory" (London,
1885), Preface; T. H. Green's "Prolegomena to Ethics," Introduction;
Muirhead's "The Elements of Ethics" (N.Y., 1892); Mackenzie's "A Manual
of Ethics" (London, 1893); Jodl's "Gesduchte der Ethik" (Stuttgart,
1882), Preface.  I give but a few references, but they will serve to
illustrate how close, in the opinion of ethical writers, is the
relation between ethics and philosophy.


CHAPTER XIX, section 74.  The student who turns over the pages of
several works on metaphysics may be misled by a certain superficial
similarity that is apt to obtain among them.  One sees the field mapped
out into Ontology (the science of Being or Reality), Rational
Cosmology, and Rational Psychology.  These titles are mediaeval
landmarks which have been left standing.  I may as well warn the reader
that two men who discourse of Ontology may not be talking about the
same thing at all.  Bear in mind what was said in section 57 of the
different ways of conceiving the "One Substance"; and bear in mind also
what was said in Chapter V of the proper meaning of the word "reality."

I have discarded the above titles in my "System of Metaphysics,"
because I think it is better and less misleading to use plain and
unambiguous language.

Section 75.  See the note to Chapter XVI.


CHAPTER XX, sections 76-77.  One can get an idea of the problems with
which the philosophy of religion has to deal by turning to my "System
of Metaphysics" and reading the two chapters entitled "Of God," at the
close of the book.  It would be interesting to read and criticise in
class some of the theistic arguments that philosophers have brought
forward.  Quotations and references are given in Chapter XXXIV.


CHAPTER XXI, sections 78-79.  What is said of the science of logic, in
Chapter XVI, has, of course, a bearing upon these sections.  I suggest
that the student examine a few chapters of "The Grammar of Science";
the book is very readable.


CHAPTER XXII, sections 80-82.  The reader will find in lectures I and
II in Sir William Hamilton's "Lectures on Metaphysics" a discussion of
the utility of philosophy.  It has a pleasant, old-fashioned flavor,
and contains some good thoughts.  What is said in Chapters XVI-XXI of
the present volume has a good deal of bearing upon the subject.  See
especially what is said in the chapters on logic, ethics, and the
philosophy of religion.


CHAPTER XXIII, sections 83-87.  There is a rather brief but good and
thoughtful discussion of the importance of historical study to the
comprehension of philosophical doctrines in Falckenberg's "History of
Modern Philosophy" (English translation, N.Y., 1893); see the
Introduction.

We have a good illustration of the fact that there may be parallel
streams of philosophic thought (section 87) when we turn to the Stoics
and the Epicureans.  Zeno and Epicurus were contemporaries, but they
were men of very dissimilar character, and the schools they founded
differed widely in spirit.  Zeno went back for his view of the physical
world to Heraclitus, and for his ethics to the Cynics.  Epicurus
borrowed his fundamental thoughts from Democritus.

On the other hand, philosophers may sometimes be regarded as links in
the one chain.  Witness the series of German thinkers: Kant, Fichte,
Schelling, Hegel, Schopenhauer; or the series of British thinkers:
Locke, Berkeley, Hume, Mill.  Herbert Spencer represents a confluence
of the streams.  The spirit of his doctrine is predominantly British;
but he got his "Unknowable" from Kant, through Hamilton and Mansel.

At any point in a given stream there may be a division.  Thus, Kant was
awakened to his creative effort by Hume.  But Mill is also the
successor of Hume, and more truly the successor, for he carries on the
traditional way of approaching philosophical problems, while Kant
rebels against it, and heads a new line.

--------------------

TIME AND PERIODICITY


We can measure Time in one way only--by counting repeated motions. Apart
from the operation of the physical Law of Periodicity we should have no
natural measures of Time. If that statement be true it follows that
apart from the operation of this law we could not attain to any
knowledge of Time.[11:1] Perhaps this latter proposition may not at
first be readily granted. Few, probably, would hesitate to admit that in
a condition in which our experience was a complete blank we should be
unable to acquire any knowledge of Time; but it may not be quite so
evident that in a condition in which experience consisted of a
multifarious _but never repeated_ succession of impressions the
Knowledge of Time would be equally awanting.[12:1] Yet so it is. The
operation of the Law of Periodicity is necessary to the measurement of
Time. It is by means, and only by means, of periodic pulsative movements
that we ever do or can measure Time. Now, apart from some sort of
measurement Time would be unknowable. A time which was neither long nor
short would be meaningless. The idea of unquantified Time cannot be
conceived or apprehended. Time to be known must be measured.

Periodicity, therefore, is essential to our Knowledge of Time. But
Nature amply supplies us with this necessary instrument. The Law of
Periodicity prevails widely throughout Nature. It absolutely dominates
Life.

The centre of animal vitality is to be found in the beating heart and
breathing lungs. Pulsation qualifies not merely the nutrient life but
the musculo-motor activity as well. Eating, Walking,--all our most
elementary movements are pulsatory. We wake and sleep, we grow weary and
rest. We are born and we die, we are young and grow old. All animal life
is determined by this Law.

Periodicity--generally at a longer interval of pulsation--equally
affects the vegetal forms of life. The plant is sown, grows, flowers,
and fades.

Periodicity is to us less obvious in the inanimate world of molecular
changes; yet it is in operation even there. But it is more especially in
the natural motions of those so-called material masses which constitute
our physical environment that Periodicity most eminently prevails.
Indeed it was by astronomers that the operation of this Law was first
definitely recognised and recorded. Periodicity is the scientific name
for the Harmony of the Spheres.

The two periodic motions which most essentially affect and concern us
human beings are necessarily the two periodic motions of the globe which
we inhabit--its rotation upon its axis which gives us the alternation of
Day and Night, and its revolution round the Sun which gives us the year
with its Seasons. To the former of these, animal life seems most
directly related; to the latter, the life of the vegetal orders. It is
evident that the forms of animal life on the globe are necessarily
determined by the periodic law of the Earth's diurnal rotation. This
accounts for the alternations of waking and sleeping, working and
resting, and so forth. In like manner the more inert vitality of the
vegetable kingdom is determined by the periodic law of the Earth's
annual revolution. When fanciful speculators seek to imagine what kind
of living beings might be encountered on the other planets of our
system, they usually make calculations as to the force of gravity on the
surface of these planets and conjure up from such data the possible size
of the inhabitants, their relative strength and agility of movement,
etc. So far so good. But the first question we should ask, before
proceeding to our speculative synthesis, should rather be the length of
the planet's diurnal rotation and annual revolution periods. Certain
planets, such as Mars and Venus, have rotation periods not very
different from those of our own Earth.[14:1] Other things being equal,
therefore, a certain similarity of animal life must be supposed possible
on these planets. On the other hand, the marked difference in their
revolution period would lead us to expect a very wide divergence between
their lower forms of life, if any such there be, and our own terrestrial
vegetation. The shorter the annual period the more would the vegetal
approximate to the animal, and _vice versa_. It would, however, be
foolish to waste more time over a speculation so remote.

But these two facts remain unshaken:--(1) That our measurements and
whole science of Time depend absolutely on the operation throughout
Nature of the Law of Periodicity, and (2) that the periodicities which
affect and determine animal and vegetal life upon our Earth are the
periodic movements of rotation and revolution of that Earth itself.

Now it is to the curvilinear motions of the heavenly bodies that we must
ascribe our subjection to the periodic law. If these heavenly bodies
moved for ever in straight lines, as they would do if unacted on by
natural forces, the periodic rhythm of Nature would disappear.

It is to the fact that all Nature is under the constraint due to the
constant silent operation of physical Force that we owe, therefore, the
law which determines the most essential features of vitality. The
pulsations in which life consists and by which it is sustained are
attributable to the constraint and limitation which we recognise as the
effect of the operation of Natural Force. It is to this same cause that
we ascribe the resistance of cohering masses in virtue of which
sensation arises and by which our experience is punctuated. It is by
means of these obstructions to free activity that our experience is
denoted, and by reference to these that it is cognised. Indeed, Activity
itself as we know it depends upon and presupposes the existence of
these cohering masses.

Thus the operation of Natural Force and the constraint and limitation
which are thereby imposed upon our activity appear at once to determine
the conditions of life and to furnish the fundamental implements of
Knowledge.

We cannot overleap the barriers by which Life is constrained. These,
whilst, on the one hand they seem to _create the environment_ which
sustains Life, on the other hand seem to impose upon it the limitations
under which it inevitably fails and dies. We cannot even in imagination
conceive, either as reality or as fancy, the illimitable puissance of a
Life perfectly free and unrestrained. Yet the assurance that Perfect
Love could overcome the bonds of Materiality and Death encourages in
mankind the Hope of an existence beyond the impenetrable veil of
physical limitation. And this at any rate may be admitted, namely, that
that dynamic condition in which materiality arises is also the
condition-precedent of Tridimensionality, of Force, of Time, and of
Mutation. But we cannot thus account for the _elan vital_ itself.


FOOTNOTES:

[11:1] Plato in the dialogue _Timæus_ tells us that Time was born with
the Heavens, and that Sun, Moon, and Planets were created in order that
Time might be.

[12:1] This might be contrasted with the statement of M. Bergson who
tells us (_Evolution créatrice_, p. 11): "Plus nous approfondirons la
nature du temps plus nous comprendrons que durée signifie invention,
création de formes, elaboration continue de l'absolument nouveau."

[14:1] Recently, we believe, astronomers have favoured the view that the
day of Venus is equal in length to her year.




II

THE ORIGIN OF PHYSICAL CONCEPTS


"_Penser c'est sentir_," said Condillac. "It is evident," said Bishop
Berkeley, "to one who takes a survey of the _objects_ of Human Knowledge
that they are either ideas actually imprinted on the senses or else such
as are perceived by attending to the passions and operations of the
Mind, or lastly ideas formed by help of memory and imagination either
combining, dividing, or barely representing those originally perceived
in the foresaid ways." J. S. Mill tells us, "The points, lines, circles,
and squares which one has in his mind are, I apprehend, simply copies of
points, lines, circles, and squares which he has known in his
experience," and again, "The character of necessity ascribed to the
truths of Mathematics and even, with some reservations to be hereafter
made, the peculiar certainty attributed to them is an illusion." "In the
case of the definitions of Geometry there exist no real things exactly
conformable to the definitions." Again Taine, "_Les images sont les
exactes reproductions de la sensation._" Again Diderot, "_Pour imaginer
il faut colorer un fond et détacher de ce fait des points en leur
supposant une couleur differente de celle du fond. Restituez à ces
points la même couleur qu'au fond,--à l'instant ils se confondent avec
lui et la figure disparait_," etc. Again, Dr. Ernest Mach, Vienna,
remarks, "We are aware of but one species of elements of Consciousness:
sensations." "In our perceptions of Space we are dependent on
sensations." Dr. Mach repeatedly refers to "space-sensations," and
indeed affirms that all sensation is spatial in character.[18:1]

According to the view of Knowledge of which we have extracted examples
above, the ideas of the mind are originally furnished to it by
sensation, from which therefore are derived, not necessarily all our
Thoughts, but all the materials of Discourse, all that constitutes the
essence of Knowledge.

Our purpose at the moment is to show that this view is altogether false,
and our counter proposition is, that it is from our Activity that we
derive our fundamental conceptions of the external world; that
sensations only mark the interruptions in the dynamic Activity in which
we as potent beings partake, and that they serve therefore to denote and
distinguish our Experience, but do not constitute its essence.

We do not propose now to devote any time to the work of showing that
sensations from their very nature could never become the instruments of
Knowledge. We propose rather to turn to the principal ideas of the
external world which are the common equipment of the Mind in order to
ascertain whether in point of fact they are derived from Sensation.

Of course to some extent the answer depends on what we mean by
Sensation. If by that term we intend our whole Experience of the
external, then of course it necessarily follows--or, at least, we
admit--that our Knowledge of the external must be thence derived. But
such a use of the term is loose, misleading, and infrequent. The only
safe course is to confine the term Sensation to the immediate data of
the five senses--touch, sight, hearing, smell, and taste, with probably
the addition of muscular and other internal feelings. It is in this
sense that the word is usually employed, and has been employed by the
Sensationalist School themselves.

Now we might perhaps begin by taking the idea of Time as a concept
constantly employed in Discourse, but of which it would be absurd to
suggest that it is supplied to us by Sensation. It might, however, be
urged in reply that the idea of Time is not derived from the external
world at all, but is furnished to us directly by the operations of the
Mind, and that therefore its intellectual origin need not involve any
exception to the general rule that the materials of our Knowledge of the
world are furnished by Sensation alone. Without, therefore, entering
upon any discussion of the interesting question as to what is the real
nature of Time, we shall pass to the idea of Space.

Mach, the writer whom we have already quoted, in his essay on _Space and
Geometry_ speaks constantly and freely of sensations of Space, and as
there can be no denial of the fact that Space is a constituent of the
external world, it would seem to follow that those who hold Sensation to
be the only source of our Knowledge must be obliged to affirm the
possibility of sensations of Space. Mach indeed claims to distinguish
physiological Space, geometrical Space, visual Space, tactual Space as
all different and yet apparently harmoniously blended in our Experience.
He is, however, sadly wanting in clearness of statement. He never tells
us when and where exactly we do have a sensation of Space. In truth he
never gets behind the postulate of an all-enveloping tridimensional
world; so that he throughout assumes Space as a datum, and his inquiry
is an effort to rediscover Space where he has already placed it.

Let us, however, consider for a moment what can be meant by a sensation
of Space. Does it not look very like a contradiction in terms? Pure
Space, if it means anything, means absolute material emptiness and
vacuity. How, then, by any possibility can it give rise to a sensation?
What sensory organ can it be conceived as affecting? How and in what way
can it be felt?

The truth is the idea of Space is essentially negative. It represents
absence of physical obstruction of every kind. No doubt, we may describe
it positively as a possibility of free movement, and such a description
is at once true and important. Yet even _it_ involves a negative. The
term "free" is in reality, though not in form, a negative term and means
"unconstrained." And the reason why such a term is necessarily negative
is to be found in the fact that a state of dynamic constraint is the
essential condition under which we enter upon our organic existence.
Freedom is a negation of the Actual. Absolute freedom is a condition
only theoretically possible, and is essentially the negation of the
state of restraint in which our life is maintained.

But the definition last quoted is nevertheless valuable because it
clearly shows what really is the origin of the idea of Space. It proves
that the idea of Space is a representation of one condition of our
Activity. It is because the primary work of Thought is to represent the
forms of our dynamic Activity that we find the idea of Space so
necessary and fundamental.

But it will perhaps be argued that our ordinary sensations carry with
them a spatial meaning and implication, and that indirectly, therefore,
our sensations _do_ supply us with the idea of Space. It will readily be
agreed that if this is so of any sensations it is pre-eminently true of
the sensations of vision and touch. Indeed, it will perhaps not be
disputed that the ordinary vident man derives from the sensations of
vision his most common spatial conceptions. We propose, therefore, to
inquire very briefly how the character of spatial extension becomes
associated with the data of Vision.

The objects of Vision appear to be displayed before us in immense
multitude, each distinct from its adjacent neighbour, yet all
inter-related as parts of one single whole--the presentation thus
constituting what is called Extensity.

This is the most commonly employed meaning of the term spatial. Yet it
is evidently in its origin rather temporal than spatial. In ordinary
movement we encounter by touch various obstacles, but only a very few of
these impress us at any one moment of time. On the contrary, they
succeed one after the other. To the blind, therefore, as Platner long
ago remarked: Time serves instead of Space. In Vision, on the other
hand, a large number, which it would take a very long time to encounter
in touch, are presented _simultaneously_. In this there is an immense
practical advantage, the result being that we come habitually to direct
our every action by reference to the data of Sight. Now it is because
these data--so simultaneously presented--are employed by us as the
guides of action that their presentation acquires the character which we
denominate Extensity. The simultaneous occurrence of a large number of
Sounds does not seem to us to present such a character. But let us
suppose that all the objects which constitute obstacles to our Activity
emitted Sounds by which they were recognised; it is not doubtful that
these would then come to be employed by us as the guides of our Activity
and would acquire in our minds the character of Extensity. They would
arrange themselves in a cotemporaneous, extensive, or spatial relation
to one another just as the objects of Vision do at present.

It is only, therefore, when we come to employ the simultaneous
presentation of Vision as the instrument of our Activity and the guide
of Action that it acquires the character commonly called extensive.
_Successive_ visual sensations convey no extensive suggestion.

It is important to realise the nature of this peculiar feature in the
data of Vision. The sounds which we hear, the odours which we smell, are
the immediate result of certain undulations affecting the appropriate
organ of sensation. We refer these to the object in which the
undulations originate. In like manner a light which we see is referred
to its objective luminous source. But light also and in addition is
reflected from, and thus reveals the presence of the whole body of our
resistant environment. Hence is derived the coloured presentation of
Vision to which the character of extensity attaches. Nothing similar
takes place in the case of the other distantial sensations. If sonorous
undulations excited vibration in every resistant object of the
environment they would undoubtedly come to arrange themselves in an
order resembling the extensity suggested by Vision, though the slower
rate of transmission of sound would detract from the practical
simultaneity in the effect which, as we have seen, largely accounts for
the perception of visual extensity. The universal diffusion of sunlight
is also a determining factor.

       *       *       *       *       *

The matter becomes still clearer when we contrast the experience of
vident men with what we have been able to learn of the experiences of
the blind. Nowhere have we found this aspect of the question discussed
with the same clearness and ability as by M. Pierre Villey in his
recently published essay, _Le Monde des Aveugles_--Part III.

The blind man, as he remarks, requires representations in order to
command his movements. We must then penetrate the mind of the blind and
ascertain what are his representations. Are they, he asks, muscular
images combined by temporal relations, or are they images of a spatial
order? He replies without hesitation: Both, but, above all, spatial
images. It is clear, he says, that the modalities of the action of the
blind are explained by spatial representations. These must be derived
from touch. What, then, can be the spatial representations which arise
from touch? The blind, he says, are often asked, How do you figure to
yourself such and such an object, a chair, a table, a triangle? M.
Villey quotes Diderot as affirming that the blind cannot imagine.
According to Diderot, images require colour, and colour being totally
wanting to the blind the nature of their imagination was to him
inconceivable. The common opinion, says M. Villey, is entirely with
Diderot. It does not believe that the blind can have images of the
objects around him. The photographic apparatus is awanting and the
photograph cannot therefore be there.

Diderot was a sensationalist. For this school, as Villey remarks,
_l'image est le décalque de la sensation_, and he refers not merely to
Condillac the friend of Diderot but to his continuator Taine whose
dictum we have already quoted.

Diderot attempts to solve the problem by maintaining that tactual
sensations occupy an extended space which the blind in thought can add
to or contract, and in this way equip himself with spatial conceptions.

There would, on this view, as M. Villey remarks, be a complete
heterogeneity between the imagination of the blind and that of the
vident. M. Villey denies this altogether. He affirms that the image of
an object which the blind acquires by touch readily divests itself of
the characters of tactual sensation and differs profoundly from these.
He takes the example of a chair. The vident apprehends its various
features simultaneously and at once; the blind, by successive tactual
palpations. But he maintains that the evidence of the blind is unanimous
on this point, that once formed in the mind the idea of the chair
presents itself to him immediately as a whole,--the order in which its
features were ascertained is not preserved, and does not require to be
repeated. Indeed, the idea divests itself of the great bulk of the
tactual details by which it was apprehended, whilst the muscular
sensations which accompanied the act of palpation never seek to be
joined with the idea. This divestiture of sensation proceeds to such an
extent that there is nothing left beyond what M. Villey calls the pure
form. The belief in the reality of the object he refers to its
resistance. The origin of each of these is exertional. The features upon
which the mind dwells, if it dwells upon them at all, are _les qualités
qui sont constamment utiles pour la pratique_--in a word, the dynamic
significance of the thing.

We may remark that much the same is true of the ideas of the vident. In
ordinary Discourse we freely employ our ideas of external objects
without ever attempting a detailed reproduction of the visual image.
Such a reproduction would be both impracticable and unnecessary, and
would involve such a sacrifice of time as to render Discourse altogether
impossible. All that the Mind of the vident ordinarily grasps and
utilises in his discursive employment of the idea of any physical thing
is what we have ventured to call its dynamic significance. And the very
careful analysis which M. Villey has made of the mental conceptions of
the blind clearly shows that in their case he has reached exactly the
same conclusion.

Our fundamental conceptions of the external world are therefore derived
from and are built up out of the data of our exertional Activity
combined with the interruptions which that Activity perpetually
encounters, and in which sensations arise. It would indeed be a useful
work of psychological analysis if the conditions of exertional action
were carefully and systematically investigated--much more useful than
most of the trifling experiments to which psychological laboratories are
usually devoted.

The principal elements of such a scheme would be--

(1) The force of gravity. This force constantly operating constrains
the organism to be in constant contact with the earth on which we live.
But, further, it gives us the definite idea of _Direction_. It is from
the action of gravity that we derive our distinction between Up and Down
from which as a starting-point we build up our conception of
tridimensional Space. And in this respect it must be remembered that as
the areas of spheres are proportional to the squares of their radii it
necessarily follows that gravity if it acts uniformly in tridimensional
Space _must_ vary in intensity in proportion to the square of the
distance of the point of application from the centre of origin. Gravity
and tridimensionality are in short necessarily connected.

(2) The same law which determines the force of gravity seems to
determine also the force of cohesion, and therefore the form of material
bodies. These, therefore, are necessarily subject also to
tridimensionality, and in the force which generates solid form we find a
second source of our elementary spatial ideas.

Such form is the expression of an obstacle to action which determines
all our movements, and in which we discover those forms of the
limitations of activity which we call spatial characters.

(3) Organic Dualism is a third determinant of activity, and thus also a
source of spatial ideas.

The structural dualism of the human body, its right and left, its front
and back, etc., furnish our activity with a set of constant forms to
which its action must conform, and which necessarily also partake of,
and help us to conceive of tridimensional form. It is interesting to
note that this dualism characterises the organs specially adapted to
serve exertional action rather than those which serve our vegetal or
nutrient life.

The way in which our spatial conceptions are ever extended and built up
out of the data of action is also well illustrated in the case of the
blind, and to this also M. Villey devotes an interesting chapter under
the title _La conquête des représentations spatiales_.

This is effected in their case by the high development of what we must
call active touch. Just as we distinguish between hearing and listening,
between seeing and looking, so must we distinguish between touching and
_palpation_.

Mere passive touch gives a certain amount of information, but
comparatively little. It is necessary to _explore_; that is what is done
in active touch--palpation--of different degrees.

The sensitiveness of the skin varies at different places from the tongue
downwards. Palpation by the fingers marks a further stage. The blind
also, we are told, largely employ the feet in walking as a source of
locative data.

To the concepts reached by such palpation with the hand, M. Villey gives
the name of Manual Space. In this connection he thinks it necessary to
distinguish between synthetic touch and analytic touch--the former
resulting from the simultaneous application of different parts of the
hand on the surface of a body, the latter that which we owe to the
movements of our fingers when having only one point of contact with the
object the fingers follow its contour. Various examples of the delicacy
of the information thus obtainable are given. Following two straight
lines with the thumb and index respectively, a blind man can acquire by
practice a sensibility so complete as to enable him to detect the
slightest divergence from parallelism.

The analysis passes on from the data of Space manual to those of Space
brachial; then to the information derived from walking and other
movements of the lower limbs, and then to the co-ordination of the
information derived from the sensations of hearing, which is necessarily
very important to the blind.

The conclusion of the whole matter is that our principal spatial ideas
are common alike to the blind and the vident. Both can be taught and are
taught the same geometry. Both understand one another in the
description of spatial conditions. The common element cannot possibly be
supplied either by the data of visual sensation which the blind do not
possess, or by the data of passive tactual sensation which the vident
hardly ever employ. _Une étendue commune se retrouverait à la fois dans
les données de la vue et dans celles du toucher._ The common element is
furnished by the common laws and forms of our exertional Activity by
means of which and in terms of which we all construct our conceptions of
the dynamic world of our environment.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is from our dynamic Activity also that we derive our conception of
Force. Force, though it is studied scientifically in the measurement of
the great natural forces which operate constantly, is originally known
to us in the stress or pressure to which muscular exertion in contact
with a material body gives rise. Such a force if it could be correctly
measured, would record the rate at which Energy was undergoing
transmutation, and it is from such experience of pressure that our idea
of Force is originally derived.

The mass of bodies is usually measured by their weight, _i.e._ by
gravity. Its absolute measurement must be in terms of momentum. The true
estimate of the Energy of a body moving under the impulse of a constant
Force is stated in the formula 1/2MV{2}. To ascertain M, therefore, we
must have given F and V, and these are both conceptions the original
idea of which is derived from our exertional activity.

Quantity of Matter originally means the same as amount of resistance to
initiation of motion, at first estimated by the varying amount of
personal muscular energy required to effect the motion in question,
thereafter objectively and scientifically by comparison with some
independent standard whereby a more exact estimation can be attained
than was possible by a mere reference to the varying inferences of the
individual who might exert the force.

Space, Mass, Force are all therefore ideas which are furnished to us out
of our experience as potent actors, and the recognition of this great
truth provides us with the means of clearly apprehending and co-relating
our conceptions of the external world, the framework of our Knowledge.

The true distinction between a _percept_ and a _concept_ is just that a
percept is a concept associated with the dynamic system discovered in
and by our exertional activity.

In like manner we find here the true solution of the many questions
which have been raised as to the distinction between general and
abstract, singular and concrete terms.

Language expresses action: the roots of language are expressions of the
elementary acts which make up experience. They are therefore general.
Each applies to every act of the class in question. They are also
concrete. That is so because they refer to exertional activities.
Abstract terms are terms abstracted from this dynamic reference. Thus
_white_ is concrete because colour is a property of the dynamic world.
But when this property is considered apart from its dynamic support it
is called _whiteness_, and becomes abstract. In the case of purely
mental qualities the term is regarded as abstract simply because the
quality is in every reference extra dynamic. Thus _candour_, _justice_
are called abstract terms; they are properties of the Mind. But a
property of the dynamic system, _e.g._ Gravitation, does not strike us
as abstract--the sole distinction being the dynamic reference which the
latter term implies.

It will even be seen that there is sometimes a shading off of abstract
quality. Thus _Justice_ as an attribute of the Mind strikes us as a
purely abstract term. But as the word takes up a dynamic reference so
does its abstraction diminish. Thus in the expression "Administration of
Justice" the abstractive suggestion is less pronounced; till in the
person of Justice Shallow it vanishes in the very concrete.

Behind and beneath all these considerations we should never lose sight
of the great main facts--that thought is an activity; that its function
therefore is to represent or reproduce our pure exertional activity;
that such representation is _at the basis_ of all our concepts of
externality; that sensation, _per se_ is mere interruption of activity;
that _per se_ it possesses no spatial or extensive or external
suggestiveness; that sensations nevertheless serve to denote or give
feature and particularity to our experience of activity; that all
perception of the external is at bottom therefore a mental
representation of exertional activity and its forms, denoted,
punctuated, identified by sensation, which latter by itself, we repeat,
carries no suggestion of externality. This view revolutionises the whole
psychology of Perception, and therefore, though it at once gives to that
science a much-needed unity, clarity, and simplicity, it will naturally
be accepted with reluctance by the laborious authors of the cumbrous
theories still generally current.


FOOTNOTES:

[18:1] His reason is that we _ab origine_ localise sensations with
reference to our organism. This, of course, means by reference to the
system of potent energy in which our organism essentially consists.




III

THE TWO TYPICAL THEORIES OF KNOWLEDGE


The evolution of living organisms is in general a gradual and continuous
process. But it is nevertheless true that it presents well-marked stages
and can best be described by reference to these. Frequently, moreover,
the meaning and true nature of the movement at one stage is only
revealed after a subsequent stage has been reached.

The development of a brain or cerebrum marks one important advance. The
presence of this organ renders possible to the animal in varying degree
what are called representations of objects, and the faculty of making
such representations appears to be a condition precedent to the
development of deliberation, volition, and purposive action as opposed
to reflex or instinctive activity. The latter is specially
characteristic of other orders of organic existence such as the
Articulata--being remarkably exemplified in the activities of the social
insects such as the bee.

The advent of man with his faculty of Discourse may be regarded as
marking another distinct stage in the evolutionary movement--a stage,
moreover, the operations of which throw light upon the whole nature of
cerebral representations. The faculty of rational Discourse, as
Max Müller pointed out, is denominated in Greek by the word λόγος,
applicable at once to the mental activity and to its appropriate
expression in speech. Discourse is an instrument by means of which man
has been enabled to construct his whole system of representations of the
world in which he lives, the system of what is commonly called his
Knowledge. Human Knowledge just is the body of man's representations of
his Experience in the world of which he forms a part. It is not
necessary to insist here on the gradual but remarkable growth and
extension which Human Knowledge has undergone during the last two
thousand years. Concurrently with its extension man's ability to control
the forces of Nature has been enlarged and increased. At the same time,
however, that extension has rendered possible false developments and
aberrations to which the more limited representations of the brute are
less liable.

With the faculty of rational Discourse constantly striving to extend the
bounds of Knowledge, man came in time to attempt to give an account not
only of the immediate objects which surround him, but of the whole choir
of Heaven and furniture of Earth. In this advance the Greeks took a
leading part.

When we first make acquaintance through historical records with the
intellectual activity of the Greek mind, we find it engaged in the
construction of various such schemes for an explanation of the
world--usually called cosmogonies.

It was at this stage of intellectual progress that what we might call an
interruption occurred in the normal process of evolution. Great
intellectual activity had for some time prevailed in the Greek
communities; several men of conspicuous genius--notably Heracleitus and
Parmenides--had carried speculation as to the origin and nature of the
world to a height hitherto undreamt of. These achievements and the
consciousness of continual progress had engendered in Athens
particularly what might be called an epidemic of intellectual pride.

On this scene Socrates appeared, plain, blunt, critical. His teaching
was in effect an appeal to men to reflect: to turn their attention away
from the world which they were supposed to be explaining to the
contemplation of their own Minds by which the explanation was
furnished. γνῶθι σεαυτόν was his motto. All explanations of the
Universe or of Experience were, as he showed, vain unless the Cognitive
Faculty by which they were constructed were operating truly. In
particular, the process of Rational Discourse implied the use of
concrete general terms, which were recognised to be the essential
instruments of Cognition. Socrates therefore devoted his attention
specially to a critical examination of these general terms and also of
the abstract terms which were the familiar instruments of Discourse.

The Greeks of that day were endowed with a singular clearness of
intellectual vision. They readily recognised that Knowledge was an
intellectual process; they appreciated the activity of Thought or
Rational Discourse as essential to its formation. They quite understood
that Knowledge is not of the nature of a photograph--a resemblant
pictorial reproduction of the data furnished by sensation. Only very
casually and occasionally do we ever attempt to supply ourselves with a
resemblant reproduction of our sensations. Obviously such a reproduction
would only be of value memorially and could tell us nothing new.

These early Greeks realised this, and they appear to have realised also
pretty clearly that it would be impossible by means of such pictorial
impressions to establish any community of Knowledge. It is of the
essence of Knowledge that it is something which can be communicated to,
and which is the common possession of, several individuals. That can
never be true of sensation. We can never tell whether our sensations are
the same as those of other people--never at any rate by means of
sensations themselves; never unless and until such sensations have been
inter-related by some other instrument. A mere photographic reproduction
of sensation is thus quite useless as a means of Knowledge.

In some way or other general terms supply the common bond. The
recognition of this fact was one of the great results of the Socratic
discussion. This explains the immense importance which Socrates
naturally attached to the criticism of general and abstract terms.

       *       *       *       *       *

The work of Socrates in this direction was immediately taken up and
carried much further by Plato. Plato maintained that these general and
abstract terms were in truth the names of ideas (εἲδη) with which the
mind is naturally furnished, and further that these ideas corresponded
to and typified the eternal forms of things--the essential constituents
of the real world. Knowledge was possible because there were such
eternal forms or ideal elements--the archetypes--of which the εἴδη
were the counterparts and representations.

Knowledge, Plato held, was concerned solely with these eternal forms,
not with sensation at all. The sensible world was in a state of constant
flux and could not be the object of true science. Its apprehension was
effected by a faculty or capacity (_Republic_, v. 478-79) midway between
Knowledge and nescience to which he applied the term δόξα, frequently
translated _opinion_, but which in this connection would be much more
accurately rendered, _sensible impression_, or even perception. At any
rate, the term _opinion_ is a very unhappy one, and does not convey the
true meaning at all, for no voluntary intellective act on the part of
the subject was implied by the term. Now intelligence in constructing a
scheme of Knowledge is active. The ideas are the instruments of this
activity.

Plato's doctrine of ideas was probably designed or conceived by him as
affording an explanation also of the community of Knowledge. He
emphasised the fluent instability of the sensible impression, and as we
have already pointed out, sensation in itself labours also under this
drawback that it contains and affords no common nexus whereby the
conceptions or perceptions of one man can be compared or related with
those of another.

Indeed, if Experience were composed solely of sensations, each
individual would be an isolated solipsistic unit--incapable of rational
Discourse or communication with his fellow-men. To cure this defect,
Plato offered the ideas--universal forms common to the intelligence of
every rational being. Not only would they render possible a common
Knowledge of Reality--the existence of such ideas would necessarily also
give permanence, fixity, law, and order to our intellectual activity.
Our Knowledge would not be a mere random succession of impressions, but
a definitely determined organic unity.

In all this argument it must be remembered Plato never said or suggested
that the intellect of man--thus equipped with ideal forms--was thereby
enabled to become, or did become, the creator of the world by and in
which each one believes himself to be surrounded and included. He always
distinguished between Idea and Reality, between Thought and Thing. The
ideas were types of the forms immanent in things themselves. It has been
said by some scholars that he generally distinguished between the two
by the employment of distinct terms, applying εἷδος to the mental
conception and ἰδέα to the substantial form. This verbal distinction
was accepted by many scholars of the epoch of Liddell and Scott and
Davies and Vaughan. A reference to this distinction in the present
writer's essay on _The Dynamic Foundation of Knowledge_ provoked at the
instance of one critic the allegation that it is not borne out by a
critical study of the Platonic texts. That is a matter of little moment
and one upon which the writer cannot claim to pronounce. The important
point is that in one way or another Plato undoubtedly distinguished
between and indeed contrasted the idea and the substantial form. No
trace of the solipsism which results from their being confounded and
which has ultimately brought to destruction the imposing edifice of
Hegelian Thought is to be found in his writings.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Platonic doctrine of ideas speedily found an energetic critic in
Aristotle. In Aristotle's view, it was quite unnecessary and
unwarrantable to postulate the existence in the Mind of ideal forms or
counterparts of the substantial forms of Reality. This, according to
him, was a wholly unnecessary reduplication. He was content to believe
that the mind found and recognised the essential forms of things when
they were presented to it in perceptive Experience. _Universalia in re_
were conceived by him as sufficiently explaining the genesis of
cognition without the postulation of any such _universalia extra rem_.

       *       *       *       *       *

To the Platonic doctrine he offered the further objection that the
eternal forms of things which that doctrine affirmed and which it
declared to be represented in their ideal types were necessarily
impotential. There was no generative power in the pure activity of
Thought. If, therefore, the essentials of Reality were ideal, it
followed that they also were impotent, and incapable of causative
efficacy. The sensible world, however, was a fluent and perpetually
generated stream, which required some potent cause to uphold it.

The eternal Reality which sustained the world was for him an Energy
constantly generating the actual, and no conception which failed to
provide for this process of causative generation of the things of Sense
could in his view adequately account for the phenomena of Nature nor
consequently could constitute the system of science.

In this argument Aristotle undoubtedly expressed a profound truth, but
it may perhaps be admitted that he rather failed to appreciate fully
the difficulty which the Platonic doctrine was designed to meet--that,
namely, of providing some sort of common nexus or unifying principle by
which the validity of Knowledge could be maintained. For he had no
certain means of showing that the potent energy of Nature was unitary
and homogeneous.

He is frequently described as a sensationalist, but such a view is
certainly incorrect. This, however, may be admitted--that he sought the
essentials of Reality not in the Mind but in the Object. It may be
fairly claimed that to this extent he occupied common ground with the
sensationalists, in that he was an adherent of the _tabula rasa_ view of
the Mind, expressed in the maxim:--

_Nihil est in intellectu quod non fuit in sensu._

       *       *       *       *       *

Plato and Aristotle may be taken as typical of the two principal
intellectual tendencies which have characterised all subsequent
speculation--the Platonist, he who finds in the constitution of the Mind
the eternal principles or at least the types of the eternal principles
of Reality; the Aristotelian, he for whom these seem to reside in the
object and, in the act of Cognition, are merely impressed upon,
transferred to, presented to, or otherwise introduced into or
apprehended by the Mind.

The Aristotelian view of Nature as an energetic process failed to
impress itself upon his successors. Greek Philosophy soon after
Aristotle's death decayed or was deprived of its early vigour, and the
doctrine which survived the wreck was essentially derived, however
imperfectly, from the Platonic theory.

Throughout the first fifteen hundred years of the Christian era this
doctrine undoubtedly dominated the course of speculation--a speculation
of which much is now forgotten and almost as much was certainly barren
and unfruitful, but of which we would entertain a very mistaken notion
if we were to imagine that it was not often pursued with great subtlety
and acumen.

One natural result of the fact that such a principle dominated human
thought was the prevalence of a belief that the explanation of Nature
and natural processes could be derived from the cognitive faculty
itself. Our cognition of our immediate surroundings was doubtless
continuously corrected by immediate practical tests. But the science of
a more extended view of Nature was vitiated by this false principle and
in consequence for many centuries our whole Knowledge of Nature remained
unprogressive and unfruitful.

_Causa æquat effectum_, Nature abhors a vacuum, are examples of the
maxims derived or supposed to be derived from the necessities of our
Reason, and by the aid of which it was vainly hoped to attain a
knowledge of Nature and natural laws.

The principle was in itself unsound.

The necessary laws of our rational faculty could discover to us only the
essentials of that faculty itself.

The maxims by which it was sought to constitute _a priori_ a scheme of
natural laws could not justly claim descent from the necessities of
Thought. Had the Schoolmen formed a true conception of the nature of
Knowledge they would never have imagined that any necessity of Thought
obliged them to believe that a 10 lb. weight would fall to the ground
more rapidly than a 1 lb. weight. Equally true is it that their
scientific principles had not been derived from any study of the action
of natural law. They were unacknowledged intellectual orphans.

The movement associated with the names of Galileo, Bruno, Bacon, Kepler,
and Newton owed its origin and its success to the abandonment of this
vicious principle. So far as Nature was concerned, the Mind was regarded
as a _tabula rasa_, and the physician set himself to ascertain the laws
of nature not by reflection upon his own mental processes or
requirements, but by experiment with and observation of natural
processes themselves. The result has been the establishment of modern
science--the greatest triumph which the human mind has yet achieved.

     In a criticism of the writer's essay on _The Dynamic
     Foundation of Knowledge_ in the _Revue neo-scolastique_ of
     Louvain, the critic wrote as follows: "Remarquons qu'il n'a
     pas compris la synthèse scolastique du moyen âge, elle qui
     cependant a concilié d'une façon admirable l'_actuel_ et le
     _potentiel_ dans l'explication de la nature des choses. Il
     s'est mepris aussi sur les caractères de la méthode
     scolastique de connaître la constitution intime du monde
     experimental; il croît cette méthode exclusivement deductive."

     We have felt that candour demanded that we should quote the
     foregoing passage--coming as it does from a source
     exceptionally well qualified to express an opinion. If we have
     nevertheless allowed ourselves in the precedent paragraphs of
     this essay to express again the view which this critic seeks
     to qualify, but which we still think in the main sound, we are
     at the same time very glad to be able in this way to invite
     attention to the undoubted fact that the distinction between
     the actual and the potential was recognised by the schoolmen
     as of a very deep significance. We believe further that the
     real secret of the failure of mediævalism to extend its
     Knowledge of Nature was not so much a preference for
     deductive over inductive methods as the failure to realise
     that Nature was a dynamic operation.

It is important, then, to understand accurately what is the method of
Science.

The external world of our Experience seems to be composed of sensible
impressions. The ever present visual panorama combined with the constant
occurrence of other sensations suggests that Nature is, as has so often
been asserted, simply another name for the sensible presentation. A
truer view of Nature was adumbrated by Aristotle when he formulated the
theory of an Energy ever generative of the sensible. If the founders of
Science did not fully grasp the Aristotelian conception, it is at least
certain that they looked upon Nature not merely as a sensible
presentation but as a process--a dynamic operation. It was to the study
of these operations, to the measurement of the natural forces or normal
categories of physical action that Galileo and Newton devoted
themselves. The true estimate of a moving force may indeed be said to
have been their first great problem, just as the law of universal
gravitation was their grandest generalisation.

It was to this sure instinct that the founders of Science owed their
success. Had they devoted themselves to the mere study of sensations--of
blue things and green things, of hard things and soft things, of loud
things and silent things--Science as an efficient and co-ordinated
system would never have come into being.

       *       *       *       *       *

Having struck the right path, they moved rapidly along it, leaving the
Schoolmen and Philosophers behind them, suspicious, hostile, and amazed.

But Philosophy did not remain altogether negative. The new movement
extended itself to Metaphysics, and under the leadership of Descartes a
resolute effort was made to reform Philosophy on sympathetic lines.

It was in the true spirit of Socrates that Descartes advanced his famous
method of Doubt. The whole fabric of beliefs and rational principles was
to be subjected to a re-examination, and Descartes found himself on
bedrock when he touched his famous _Cogito, ergo sum._ The simple fact
or act of Doubt implied the Activity--the Reality therefore--of the
Doubter. But the cogitant subject was reduced very much to the condition
of a _tabula rasa_, and when Descartes proceeded to fill up the blank
with a rediscovery on more scientific lines of the essentials of
Cognition he found his basal feature in Extension. Tridimensional Space
seemed the simple elementary framework of our Knowledge of Nature.

The method of Descartes was further extended by the English philosopher
Locke. Those qualities which formed the elements of Knowledge were
described by him as the primary qualities of body; the sensible
presentation comprised also the secondary qualities which seemed to be
in some way superposed upon and contained within the former.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our fundamental ideas of Nature were called by Locke sensible ideas.
These ideas were derived from our sensible Experience, and it is only
just to Locke to point out that, when examined in detail, his sensible
ideas are seen to be not mere qualifications of sensation, but rather
the elementary characters of Nature viewed as a dynamic process and
discovered by our Activity. Yet the ambiguous term _sensible ideas_
unfortunately led to their being regarded as ideas derived, not from our
action in any form, but from pure sensation alone.

This extraordinary error was intensified in the speculation of Berkeley
and Hume. Experience with them appeared to consist solely of a
succession of sensations appearing to, impressing, or affecting a
_tabula rasa_ of consciousness.

Of course in such a state of affairs all Knowledge would be impossible.
The scepticism which logically followed from such a doctrine was too
universal to be capable even of the fiction that it was credible.
Berkeley, it is true, endeavoured to save the situation by postulating
the incessant and immediate intervention of the Deity as the sustainer
of the sensible panorama. This purely arbitrary and fictitious expedient
was entirely rejected by Hume, who with fearless honesty carried to its
ultimate results the direct consequences of the doctrine and then
complacently left human Knowledge to take care of itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

A masterly protest against the position of Hume was made by his
countryman Reid, who in his _Inquiry into the Human Mind_ very clearly
pointed out the fundamental difference between the sensible
accompaniments or constituents of our Experience and the real and
independently existent substratum by which that Experience is sustained
and organised. His argument, though it attracted considerable attention,
did not, however, affect as deeply as might have been expected the
future of philosophic speculation, probably because he offered no new
clue or key whereby to detect the origin and account for the presence in
our Experience of those enduring and substantial elements or forms by
which it is sustained, but on the contrary left their recognition to
what he rather vaguely described as common sense.

       *       *       *       *       *

Much more influential was the elaborate answer of Kant, which has
profoundly affected the course of Metaphysics since its publication.
Reverting in principle to the platonic method, Kant again sought the
enduring elements, the fundamentals of Science, in the constitution of
the cognitive faculty itself. But very differently from Plato he
discovered these in the categories or essential forms of intellective
action,--the category of causality and dependence and the so-called
forms of the transcendental æsthetic--Time and Space. Under these
categories the indefinite data of sensation were thought to be organised
into a cognisable system.

A rapid advance of speculation along the lines signalised by Kant took
place after his work was published, and for many years this movement was
regarded by a large part of the speculative world as the most hopeful
and progressive of philosophic efforts, and by its own votaries as
placing them in a position of superiority to all other schools of
thought. The thoroughness of their studies and introspective methods to
some extent justified, or at least excused the arrogance of their
pretensions.

But it is to-day almost unnecessary even to criticise this Philosophy.

From the first it was foredoomed to failure, and had no prospect of
succeeding where Plato--equipped with armour from the same forge--had
already failed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kantianism like Platonism failed because it still left the sensible
unaccounted for. Not only did it fail to tell us whence came these
sensations which, however transitory and unreal, constantly saluted our
consciousness and largely constituted our Experience; it failed also to
show us how they could be brought into relation with the faculty of
Knowledge.

Finding its elemental forms in the structure of the organ of Knowledge,
it failed to tell us how we ever managed by means of these to get beyond
our own subjective states, or how we ever came to think that there was a
World outside of the individual consciousness, by the categories of
which, according to them, our cognitions of such a World were called
into being. For if Reality were unknowable except by and through the
categories, then our Knowledge of Reality was the creature of our own
mental activity, and we must still remain unable to understand why we
should suppose that we had got beyond ourselves.

These defects of Kantianism were early recognised by Schopenhauer, who
also appears to have realised that what was wanted was another and a new
key to unlock the gateway of Knowledge.

Knowledge was in essence an affirmation or series of affirmations about
a real World distinct from the Knower. It was surely now obvious that
the warrant for such affirmations and the source of their validity must
come from somewhere beyond the cognitive faculty itself. The source upon
which men again and again have seemed to fall back is Sensation; but
Sensation being transitory and dependent for its existence upon its
being felt can really give us no help. Some other, some self-existent
thing is wanted, and with considerable insight Schopenhauer suggested
that the key was to be found in the Will.

But this theory, though it has lately attracted considerable attention,
can hardly be claimed as offering any definite prospect of a solution.
Its cardinal defect is that it still fails to show how the sensible
arises. It is supposed to be generated out of pure Volition, but no
causal nexus, no direct connection of any kind is immediately apparent
between the two, and Schopenhauer in developing his theory did nothing
to supply the want. The doctrine cannot therefore be regarded as more
than a helpful stepping-stone to the true answer.

       *       *       *       *       *

In recent years various forms of opportunist philosophies under the
names of Pragmatism, Pluralism, etc., have endeavoured to elude the
pressure of the dilemma and to solace mankind for the failure of
Kantianism by advising them to accept Experience as it is. But though
such a counsel of resignation may in a popular sense of the term be
regarded as philosophical it can hardly be accepted as a solution.

       *       *       *       *       *

We find, then, that since man first began to inquire reflectively upon
the nature of his cognitive faculty his speculation has followed one or
other of two great lines or divisions of theory, neither of which has
been found to afford intellectual satisfaction.

We have (1) the theory that seeks in some way or other to derive the
real constituents of Science from the constitution of the cognitive
faculty itself. To this theory, which has inspired one whole stream of
speculation from Plato to Hegel, there are at least two absolutely fatal
objections.

(_a_) It fails altogether to account for the sensible presentation which
however fluent and unstable appears to stand in a direct and even
unique relation to the real. It fails to let us understand how that
relation arises, how the sensible is generated, or how it enters into
our consciousness.

(_b_) We are unable under this theory to discover how we ever reach a
Knowledge of the real World, how we can get beyond ourselves, how if the
Mind in its search for truth is perpetually intercepted by its own forms
it can ever furnish us with any genuine cognitions of the external.

(2) We have the theory that the essential forms of Reality are to be
found in the Object and are thence supplied to the Understanding, which
plays the part merely of a receptive surface or _tabula rasa_.

In the hands of Aristotle this doctrine took the form of an affirmation
that Nature must be regarded as an energetic process containing within
itself the potency by which it perpetually generated the actual.

Promising as it was in Aristotle's hands, this speculation was not
carried forward or assimilated by his immediate successors. Indeed, it
was practically forgotten until the intellectual revival of the
sixteenth century, which inaugurated the foundations of modern Science.
However little the fact may have been consciously recognised even by
the leaders of scientific discovery, this was the conception of Nature
which inspired and sustained the scientific advance. In the department
of philosophic speculation, however, it appeared only under the debased
and misleading form of a belief that the sensible presentation was the
true source of the contents of Cognition, that it was from Sensation
that the Mind of Man derived the whole fabric of Science. "_Penser c'est
sentir_" was the form in which it was expressed by Condillac, but was
equally the view which commended itself to Berkeley, at least in his
early writings, to Hume, and to a whole army of successors down to J. S.
Mill.

We hope we have already sufficiently emphasised the falsity of such a
view. Obviously, if the Mind were merely the passive recipient of a
stream of impressions, no sort of rational Discourse, no scientific or
cognitive effort could ever have been stimulated into activity, and the
very ideas of causality and relation, indeed all that we associate with
the exercise of the understanding, could never have been called into
being.

Upon neither of these views of the nature of Knowledge can we arrive at
any consistent or intelligible conception of its genesis, nature, or
method of operation.

What, then, must we do? It is hardly doubtful that if we are to make
any progress we must find another and a new key whereby to unlock the
double door that bars the entrance to the inner shrine of truth.

Now _the_ fundamental, or at least _a_ fundamental error characteristic
of all these various efforts after a solution is to be found in the fact
that they view the World as a static thing rather than as a kinetic
process.

The World to vision seems a great still thing in or on which no doubt
innumerable bodies are moving to and fro, but which itself--the
fundamental thing--is solid and unchanging. But this is an illusion. The
seemingly unchanging features are changeless only in the monotony of
their constant mutation.

Cohering masses are rigid in respect only of the constancy of the
dynamic process of transmutation in which cohesion consists. The sun
shines eternally steady only in consequence of the ceaseless kinetic
energies which give it being.

What we are ever doing in rational Discourse, what Knowledge constantly
accomplishes, is to furnish an account, a reproduction of a series of
operations. The World is a process--an activity. That was recognised as
long ago as the days of Heracleitus, but his disciples did
not--although we think there is good ground for believing that he
did[60:1]--his disciples did not realise that a process, whilst it
implies constant flux and change, implies also something permanent even
in its mutations, something which undergoes the change and sustains the
flow.

To understand a thing is to discover how it _operates_. The eternal
forms of things are laws of natural action. Such are the law of
gravitation, the laws of optics or of chemical combination. A static
picture unless so interpreted must be at once valueless and meaningless.

It follows that Thought and Discourse, in furnishing us with Knowledge,
must themselves be active, and must in some way or other reproduce the
activity of Nature. Thought, in short, _is_ an Activity which reproduces
the activity of things, the activity in which the phenomena of Nature
arise.

But how do we arrive at any apprehension of Natural Action? What informs
us that Nature is a potency ever operative? What suggests to us the
conception of potency at all? We reply that we arrive at the idea of
potent action because we are ourselves active beings. Our organism
maintains itself by constant physiological activities. These are the
permanent constancies of transmutation which _constitute_ the organism.

But superimposed upon these there are our voluntary exertional
activities. By these latter we necessarily mingle with and indeed
participate in the action of the natural forces which (as we usually
say) surround us, but which in point of fact do more than surround us.
The disparate grouping of natural bodies in vision blinds us to the fact
that we are really not merely surrounded by but are mingled with and
participate in the dynamic system.[61:1] We are continually pressing
with our weight upon the bodies on which we rest, we are continually
exerting or resisting the pressure of so-called adhering
masses--resistance-points in one dynamic system of which we are
ourselves a part. Thus it is that in our exertional action we reveal to
our consciousness not only the forms of our own activity but the forms
of the dynamic system which contains and yet transcends the Sensible and
the Ideal.

The theory we have suggested enables us to proceed at once to a
rational explanation of Sensation.

Sensation is _obstructed action_. A detailed consideration of as many as
you like to take of the myriad constituents of our sensible Experience
will continually and without exception confirm this simple fact.

In Nature it is the potent action which is real. It alone can be
directly represented by the activity of Thought. The mere obstruction of
activity is not a real thing, hence the unreal character of Sensation.
Yet the obstruction being an obstruction of the real action of Nature
is, if not real, at least actual and immediate. Nay, its presence in our
Experience, however mutable and unstable it may be, is the only sure
test and guarantee of Reality.

Each of the two leading theories which have dominated speculation
presents one partial aspect of the truth.

The eternal cognisable element of Reality _is_ apprehended, as the
Platonist holds, by the intellect and by the intellect alone. To that
extent the Platonist is right. That cognisable element is Action. But
Action is denoted for us only in the obstructions which it encounters.
These obstructions constitute our World of Sensible Experience, which
is therefore for each of us the sure indicator of the Real. In
recognising this fact the sensationalist is right in his turn.

       *       *       *       *       *

Not only does the dynamic conception of Nature enable us to account for
Sensation, but it lets us see how the Sensible World becomes a
constituent of Experience. It is by and through its obstructions and
these only that we featurise or denote our Experience. It is by the
breaks, the turnings in the road that we cognise its course. It is by
the line of rocks and breakers that we define the shore. But we must not
mistake the turnings for the roadway nor the shore for the ocean.

It is in and by our activity that we discover this World of sensible
obstructions. The features of the Sensible World correspond therefore to
the laws of our exertional activity, but the correspondence is
relational, not resemblant. Just so, it is by the reflection of Light
that we discover the forms of the obstacle which solid bodies oppose to
the radiant undulation. The resultant colours correspond to the form of
these obstructions; but the correspondence is relational not resemblant.
The same is true of sounds, of tactual sensations, of every other
sensible obstacle to pure activity.

By the clouds of smoke we follow or used to follow the progress of the
battle, but the battle is something other than a cloud of smoke.

We are, as Plato told us in his famous allegory, like prisoners in a
cave--our attitude averted from the aperture, and it is only by the
shadows cast upon the cavern wall that we can interpret the events which
are transacting themselves outside.

In one sense, therefore, the whole sensible and spatial World is real.
At least it is actual; and it affords us the materials from which we
construct our scheme of phenomena, and by which the kinetic process of
Reality is denoted and conceived.

The question ever and anon occurs to us--How upon this view can we solve
the problem of transcendence? How even on this view of the case do we
manage to get beyond ourselves? How are we in any way helped thereto by
the fact that Reality consists in potent action rather than in
Sensation?

Again, the answer is significant. In action, that is, in exertional
action, we are really _part_ of a larger _whole_. Our exertional action
is _ab initio_ mingled in and forms really an integral part of the
dynamic system in which our life is involved. The ever operative forces
of Gravity, Cohesion, Chemical Affinity, and so forth are the phenomenal
expression of the laws of energetic transmutation in which we partake
and of which we are organically a part, however apparently separate and
disparate our bodies may seem to be. It is life and feeling, not action,
which really distinguish the individual from his environment, at least
from his material dynamic environment. Be it noted that what is required
is not an explanation of how we transcend Experience. That by no effort
can we ever do in Knowledge. All we are required to explain is how we
transcend our Thought and our Sensibility. The answer is: Our Experience
begins in action, and it begins therefore in a sphere which is beyond
the mere subjective Consciousness, and yet is _organically one_ with the
organs of Cognition and Feeling.

It is only by a visual fiction that we come to regard our active selves
as distinct from the dynamic system. We cannot, in fact, shake off the
bonds of corporeality, of gravity, of all the various restraints of our
organic activity.

Relatively, however, the cerebral activity of Thought is liberated from
the stresses of the dynamic environment; hence the apparent freedom and
independence, under certain conditions, of Thought, Imagination, and
Volition.

A great difficulty in realising this view of Experience is to be found
in the apparent Solidity and Inertia of material bodies. Sensible
experiences group themselves round these _constancies_. But a material
body, when its sensible concomitants are abstracted, is nothing more
than a permanent process of energy transmutation the interruption of
which in one form or another may originate Sensation. It follows that
the world of spatially extended bodies is a homogeneous and consistent
whole, reflecting in its laws and forms the real operations by which it
is constituted and sustained. But all this actual World is nevertheless
phenomenal only, albeit the phenomena are derived from and related to
the Real as change is to the thing which changes.

To a large extent we are misled by the impressive prominence of the
visual data. In vision we are presented with a system of inter-related
and simultaneously occurring sensations which we find by experience to
be the sure and certain indicators of the potent obstructions which our
activity encounters. For this reason we habitually make use of the
visual sign as the guide and instrument of our exertional activity, and
this habitual use leads us to regard the visual presentation as the
essential form of Reality. However sure we are that that is a false
view, it yet is very difficult to retrace our steps and re-enter the
elemental darkness which involves the blind.

The philosophic value of the interpretation of Experience by the blind
ought therefore to be very great. Observations made on the experiences
of the blind and of those to whom vision has been restored are not very
numerous, but many of these recorded by Plainer, the friend of Leibniz,
and others are of the highest value, and remarkably confirm the view for
which we have been contending.

Undoubtedly, so far as we are aware, the most valuable contribution to
this aspect of the discussion is to be found in a little volume recently
published in Paris under the title _Le Monde des Aveugles_. The author,
M. Pierre Villey, is himself blind. In the interests of Science he has
cast aside the delicacy and reserve which have generally prevented the
blind from analysing or at least from discussing the import of their
experiences. He is also fortunately possessed of a philosophic and
highly cultivated intellect, and has not failed to make himself
acquainted with the general course of metaphysical speculation.

The present writer has been in correspondence with M. Villey, whose
conclusions remarkably confirm the view for which this essay contends,
and he finds that M. Villey recognises the truth of that view.
Individual quotations would only detract from the cumulative effect of
his argument, but we may refer in particular to the interesting
discussion as to the relations between the space concepts of the blind
and those of the vident. The blind can be taught, and are taught,
geometry, and can discuss and understand spatial and geometrical
problems. The sensible furniture by which the spatial conceptions of the
blind are denoted obviously cannot be visual, and are no doubt largely
tactual, whilst on the other hand the vident utilise the visual data to
the almost total exclusion of any other. There must therefore be some
common measure by means of which a community is established between the
spatial conceptions of the blind and those of the vident. M. Villey
concludes and clearly shows that the common medium is to be found in the
fact that our spatial conceptions are fundamentally based upon and are
expressive of the discoveries of our exertional activity. Touch, in
short, is an ambiguous term and includes both passive sensations and
those forms of Activity which we describe when we use the term "feel" as
a transitive verb. Just as we distinguish between seeing and looking or
between hearing and listening, so should we distinguish between touch
passive and touch active or palpation.

       *       *       *       *       *

The view of Science which we have endeavoured to explain has received a
notable confirmation from the establishment during the latter part of
the nineteenth century of the scientific doctrine of Energy.[69:1]

The culmination of the scientific fabric of which Galileo and Newton
laid the foundations was reached when it was demonstrated that the whole
physical universe must be regarded as composed of Energy, either kinetic
and actually undergoing transmutation from one form to another, or
potential and quiescent yet containing within itself the quantifiable
capacity of transformation. The objective correlatives of the different
classes of sensible experiences are found to be different forms which
this Energy assumes--the kinetic energy of a mass in motion, the radiant
energy of Light, the energy of Heat, the potential energy of chemical
separation, etc.--all these have now at length been shown to be forms of
one real thing capable under appropriate conditions of being transmuted
into each other and of which not only the inter-transmutability but the
equivalent values can be calculated and have been found by experiment to
be fixed and definite. Thus the mechanical equivalent of heat is a fixed
and definite quantity. The Energy of a body in motion can be measured
and stated in terms of mass and velocity.

The profound conception of Aristotle, under which Nature was regarded as
a potent Energy containing within itself the capacity of generating the
phenomenal World, has again been revived and realised--but with great
additions. The theory in the hands of Science is now not only confirmed
by incessant experiment, but the relation which it affirms between
reality and phenomenon has been _quantified_.

Moreover, the actual operations under which the potential generates the
actual have, so to say, been laid bare to view; and lastly, the
inter-transmutability of all forms of Energy and its real unity have
been established.

The doctrine has therefore received a confirmation of which Aristotle
did not dream, and its explanation has at the same time received an
illumination which his vague if profound adumbration could never afford.
With this added support the true conception of human knowledge has
received new strength. The theory is still, nevertheless, not to be
grasped without a resolute effort of reflection. It involves an
inversion of our everyday conceptions more radical than that which was
demanded by the Copernican theory of astronomy, and we know that that
theory--offered to and rejected by mankind before the beginning of the
Christian era--had to wait through sixteen or seventeen hundred years
before it secured an acceptance, at first grudging and even now not
always adequate.

       *       *       *       *       *

The ordinary metaphysical student has hitherto rather resented the idea
that in order to a true solution of the problem of Knowledge he must
acquaint himself with the fundamental conceptions of physics. Yet so it
is. It may perhaps be hoped that when the first strangeness of the new
position has disappeared the conditions may be accepted with greater
readiness. At any rate, a correct apprehension of our fundamental
conceptions of the world of our external experience is indispensable. No
theory can wholly dispense with such conceptions. It is therefore
essential that, however elementary, they should be clear and not
contradictory. Philosophy has always vaguely realised and exacted as
much. The need is now imperative.

Some years ago, in an essay on Schopenhauer, the author, Mr. Saunders,
remarked, "How the matter of which my arm is composed and that state of
consciousness which I call my Will [imagine anyone calling Will a state
of consciousness!] are conjoined is a mystery beyond the reach of
Science, and the man who can solve it is the man for whom the world is
waiting."

Well, if that be so, then the world need not wait any longer. The
required explanation is offered to metaphysics by the scientific work of
the physicians who built up and consolidated the modern doctrine of
Energy. It is true that most of them have continued to postulate the
reality of material bodies. For their purpose there was no real
difficulty in doing so. What they required was a datum of configuration,
a phenomenal basis upon which their calculations could proceed and in
terms of which, as a point of origin, their statement of transmutations
was made. The persistence of material bodies is a condition precedent to
the phenomenal manifestations in which our Experience arises. Organic
existence in every form and the world in which it arises presuppose the
actuality of these. But dynamically they are merely the phenomenal
result of certain permanent forces constantly in operation. To beings,
if there be such, inhabiting the Ether there is little doubt but that a
gravitation system like that of the sun and its planets must present a
corporate rigidity and identity somewhat similar to that which cohering
masses present to our intelligence. But, in terms of reality, Energy,
potential and kinetic, containing within itself the potency which
generates the actual and sustains the constant transmutation in which
phenomena arise is the sole and only postulate.

The rise of meta-geometrical methods and other branches of scientific
speculation have led in recent years to a considerable amount of very
interesting inquiry into the nature of our fundamental geometrical
conceptions. Strange to say, a large body of respectable mathematicians
have been found to favour the extraordinary view that our mathematical
conceptions are derived from Sensation. We do not propose here to
discuss at length this idea. It is merely another form of the old
sensationalist view of Knowledge, but we suggest that the conditions of
the problem will readily appear in their true light and real nature
whenever such inquirers realise the fact that our exertional activity is
the source of our cognitions of the external, and that therefore our
pure exertional activity is the source of the basal concepts of
geometry.

Here lies the root of the distinction between pure and empirical
science. The propositions of geometry, being derived from our own pure
activity, are of the former class; the inductive conclusions of physical
experimental science, being gathered by observation and measurement
from sensible data, are empirical and approximate. A geometrical
proposition--such, for example, as the assertion that the three angles
of a triangle are equal to two right angles--is not merely approximate.
It has no dependence on measurement. It is absolutely true. It is
ascertained deductively, and therefore measurement is not involved, and
is never employed. Its truth is not ascertained by measurement. It is
not verified by measurement. It in no degree depends upon the sensible
figure. It is equally true for every human being whatever be the degree
of accuracy of the figure by the aid of which he studies it, or indeed
whether he studies it by figure or otherwise, as must necessarily be the
case with the born blind.

There may be many different forms of energetic transmutation which may
determine many other forms of space besides that form of tridimensional
space in which our Activity is involved. For such, a different geometry
may and will be applicable; but for the tridimensional conditions of
_our activity_ the proposition is necessary and absolute. No measurement
of any stellar parallax, however minute and whatever the result might
be, could have any bearing on its truth. Geometry is the science of the
pure forms of our motor activity amidst corporeal bodies.

A useful illustration of our argument is to be drawn from a
consideration of the question of phonetic spelling. Occasionally we find
persons urging that all spelling should be an exact reproduction of
sound. Indeed, an improved alphabet has been designed to enable the idea
to be carried out with greater accuracy.

Now it is quite true that it is by their sound that we recognise or
denote our words. Hence our alphabet was originally phonetic in
principle, and indeed still is so, although the correspondence is
imperfect. As the use of visible signs develops spelling seems to fall
into certain fixed frames and to deviate more and more from pure
phonetic simplicity. But why is this so? It is because the sounds are
merely the symbols or indicators of the different forms of vocal
articulation (vocal acts), and it is really as the symbols and
indicators of these actions that they possess any meaning and acquire
such permanence and identity as they have. The phonetic system,
therefore, becomes in use subordinated to the expression of the acts by
which are produced these radical vocables which constitute the
essentials of rational Discourse.

In all this the process of the expression of words in spelling is a
microcosmic counterpart of the process of cognition as we have tried to
explain it.

It is noteworthy that the same thing necessarily happens in the case of
any new system of spelling.

The most prominent advocates of phonetic spelling have been also the
authors of a system of phonetic shorthand.

Like the written and printed alphabet of Europe, the alphabet of
Phonography was made phonetic. Indeed it started off as a more nearly
perfect phonetic system than the ordinary European alphabet. But as its
use advances its employment undergoes the same change. The phonetic
symbols are abbreviated by grammalogues and contractions, and this
proceeds in accordance with a principle unconsciously recognised but
which really depends on the same inherent necessity to preserve in a
consistent form the expression of the radical vocables of Speech.
Finally, in the hands of the expert stenographer the system of phonetic
shorthand (though he still uses the sound as the guide and indicator of
his actions) is as far removed from a pure phonetic representation as
the ordinary method of spelling. Indeed, unless some such suprasensible
and unifying principle were available, phonetic spelling would speedily
perish in an infinity of degenerate variations.

We adduce this illustration as one which very well confirms our main
argument. We have no desire to discuss on its merits the general
question of Spelling Reform, which of course is quite apart from the
attempt to establish a scheme of spelling on a purely phonetic basis. A
more rational system of spelling is nevertheless an object worthy of all
consideration.

       *       *       *       *       *

Intellectualism and sensationalism have both broken down. The world of
speculation is anxiously looking for a new clue. Witness the pathetic
eagerness with which it clutches at every floating straw. The
innumerable "isms" by which it seeks ever and anon to keep itself afloat
are most of them but the sometimes unrecognisable wreckage of the old
systems drifting about under very inappropriate names. Such terms as
Realism and Idealism are freely used (generally prefixing the adjective
"new") by writers in philosophic periodicals in a sense which might make
Plato, Aquinas, or Kant turn in their graves.

We see their votaries encumbered with the trappings of a futile
erudition of the insignificant or clinging pathetically to the insecure
relics of teleological doctrine, or, still less virile, seeking support
in a return to the unscientific tales of supernatural spiritualism. Such
efforts are vain.

Only by facing the facts with all their consequences, whatever these
may be and whatever they may involve for the proudest aspirations of
mankind--only thus can truth be attained. And lest any should say that
we preach an unrelieved pessimism, let us remind such that Knowledge is
not after all the source of Life, that another category and a different
principle--that, namely, which we indicate under the term
Love-divine--must have generated the potent current of Life, and that no
one should close the door against the hopes of the human Intelligence
until he has discovered what are the limits imposed upon what Perfect
Love can do.

The question still remains whether mankind will be equal to the effort
required to assimilate the essential truth. They very nearly failed to
assimilate the Copernican cosmogony. For sixteen hundred years after it
was first offered to mankind the race preferred to grope in the darkness
and confinement of a false conception.

If they succeed in accomplishing the reception of the new truth,
unheard-of progress may be looked for. If they fail, civilisation must
disappear and humanity decline. There is no middle course. As Bacon
remarked, in this theatre of man's life it is reserved only to God and
angels to be lookers-on.

We know how stubbornly the Ptolemaic cosmogony still clings to our
conceptions, how largely it still dominates--or till recently did
dominate--the religious cosmography of the most civilised peoples.

In Philosophy our leading teachers seem as yet to have a very feeble
appreciation of the new conditions. They turn greedily to the eloquent
pages of _L'Evolution créatrice_, but however earnestly they search they
cannot find there any definite solution of the difficulties of the
age-old problem. They wander wearily through the mazes of psychological
detail or wage almost childish logomachies over the interpretation of
each other's essays. Philosophical magazines are filled with articles
which reflect this state of the philosophic mind. Philosophical
congresses meet and argue and go home; Gifford lecturers prelect; yet so
far as can be seen there is little sign that the key has been grasped.
The great fact remains obscured amidst a mass of words.

The elucidation of the problem of Knowledge demands certain improvements
in our philosophic terminology. Language as a rule is a very unerring
philosopher, and words shaped and polished by long usage generally
express, more truly than those who use them realise, the essential
reality of things. Yet these long-enduring errors of the ages which we
have been discussing here have left their impress too on the terminology
of Metaphysics.

Thought and Action are in common speech contrasted, and the distinction
expresses an essential truth. But when we seek to say further that both
of these are Activities, we are stating another truth in terms which are
hardly consistent with the previously contrasted distinction. It might
be better if Action and Active could be applied generally to both and if
the term _exertion_ could be substituted for Action in describing the
forms of activity which we denominate _motor_. To that suggestion,
however, there are also serious objections. The words derived from _ago_
have historically a special application to the exertional and dynamic.
We leave the question to our readers as one of which it is of
considerable importance to find a satisfactory solution.

In the foregoing pages our object has been to illustrate the erroneous
conceptions by which the theory of human cognition has been obscured and
to explain briefly what we conceive to be the true solution. The
argument in support of the doctrine here explained has been more fully
presented by the present writer in an essay entitled _The Dynamic
Foundation of Knowledge_, to which the reader who desires to study the
question further must now be referred.


FOOTNOTES:

[60:1] Κόσμον τόνδε τὸν αὐτὸν ἀπάντων οὔτε τις Θεῶν οὔτε ἀνθρώπων
ἐποίησε, ἀλλ' ἧν αἰεὶ καὶ ἔστι καὶ ἔσται πῦρ ἀείζωον ἁπτόμενον μέτρα
καὶ ἀποσβεννύμενον μέτρα. Quoted by Clement of Alexandria, etc. (_The
First Philosophers of Greece_, by A. Fairbanks, p. 28.)

[61:1] "La subdivision do la matière en corps isolés est relative à
notre perception" (_Evolution créatrice_, p. 13).

[69:1] For a clear brief summary of the theory the reader may be
referred to a little work by Sir William Ramsay, F.R.S., entitled
_Elements and Electrons_, pp. 8-15.




IV

THE DOCTRINE OF ENERGY[81:1]


The problem of Metaphysics--the nature of Reality--still presses for a
solution. Agnosticism is but a cautious idealism--a timid phenomenalism.
That philosophy, however named, which proclaims that the experience of
life is nothing more than a vain show, a pantomime of sensations
distinguished only from ideas by their greater intensity and
distinctness, is not only a confession of failure. It is a denial of
fact.

To know the nature of the Absolute as such, to present the Absolute to
finite minds as it must be presented, if that be possible, to the
Absolute itself, must ever remain impossible to man. But it is equally
true that to attempt such a task has never been the urgent mission of
Philosophy. The distinction between the Ideal and the Real, between the
conceptual and the perceptual, is quite certainly and incessantly
recognised. Agnosticism can neither deny the fact successfully, nor
solve the speculative difficulties which its recognition raises up. The
Real and the Ideal, essentially distinct yet mockingly similar, for ever
blend and intermingle in the composite experience of life. Truly to
discriminate and unravel these,--validly to separate the Ideal element
which impregnates that Reality which we are for ever compelled to
postulate and recognise, still remains the great problem of
Philosophy--humbler perhaps and more practical, but not less profound
than any vain attempt to discover to finite conception the Absolute as
it is in itself. Therefore it is that the efforts of negative and
agnostic criticism to dispense with the recognition of Reality as a
necessary postulate of our activity are foredoomed to failure. They
leave us not a solitude which we might pretend to be peace, but a
seething sea of troubles urgently demanding a new attempt to reveal the
unity which must underlie the infinite diversity of experience.

Such, indeed, seems to us the present position of Metaphysics; and, what
is more important, it appears to react with increasing force upon the
theories and investigations of Science.

The problem of Reality is thus at present not without a special and
increasing interest for the students of Physical Science. Until lately
they have been taught and have always maintained that Matter is the
direct object of sense-perception. No doubt it is long since Philosophy
has urged that our conceptions of the external world are a mentally
constructed system. But this doctrine has made but little impression
upon the students of Natural Science. The objective origin of our
sensations and the apparently objective reality also of the intelligible
qualities and operative laws of the external world are too strongly
impressed upon their minds. Idealism and Transcendentalism have carried
no conviction to them. Still, the difficulties of common sense have
continued to grow. Recent developments of scientific theory have
increased the urgency of the problem, but they seem to us also to
suggest a solution the beneficial results of which affect the whole of
Metaphysics.

We refer to the doctrine of Energy, which occupies now as great a place
in the physical sciences as the doctrine of Evolution does in the
zoological sciences.

Natural philosophers have for some time taught that there are two Real
Things in the physical universe--Matter and Energy. It seems a very
striking theory. Has it received the attention it deserves from the
student of Metaphysics? We are convinced that it has not: and the reason
he most frequently gives for this neglect is that, being a purely
scientific doctrine, it does not come within his sphere. Science, we are
told, deals with the phenomenal world internally considered; Philosophy
with the relations of the phenomenal world to Reality, and with the
nature of the transcendental elements in our Knowledge.

This may be generally true. Nevertheless, Philosophy and Science have
surely concepts in common. They both refer to the same thing when they
speak of Space; we presume also when they speak of Matter. Indeed,
Philosophy analyses the conceptions involved not only in scientific
reasoning, but in the most common and ordinary mental processes. It
analyses them with special reference to the relations between the
Phenomenal and the Real--a question which, though it always lies latent,
does not in ordinary circumstances arise in urgent form. It is therefore
evident that the fundamental conceptions of Science _do_ fall within the
purview of Philosophy.

The study of Physics _can_ be carried on practically as a study of
phenomena--of Heat, Colours, Sounds, Forces, etc., all of which are
kinds of phenomena--without the expression of any dogmatic and
formulated opinion as to their relation with Reality. Physics can speak
of mass and weight and avoid all reference to Matter; but there always
is, in scientific reasoning, an implicit reference to Reality, and it
facilitates, therefore, the expression of scientific reasoning, when the
account of a physical process is stated with reference to a supposed
reality, such as Matter. And in making such reference Science _is_
thinking of the thing-in-itself. It _is_ a reference beyond phenomena.

Heat, Light, Sound, Force, are names of classes of phenomena, and the
great discovery of Physics during the nineteenth century has been that
these are all transformable into each other, and bear definite numerical
relations to each other in proportion to which such transformations take
place. Science availing itself of this discovery, unifies its conception
of Nature and gives expression to the doctrine of the
inter-transmutability of the various classes of physical phenomena by
postulating an entity called Energy, and regarding the various classes
of phenomena as transmutations which this entity undergoes. But Science
has been reluctant to recognise that it is now entitled to dispense with
the postulation of Matter. The theory, as announced by the leading men
of science, has therefore been to the effect that there exist in the
physical universe _two_ real things--Matter and Energy--in place of one
only, as commonly supposed for so long.

Now we maintain, on the contrary, that such a statement of physical
theory is erroneous and redundant; that Science is not obliged to
postulate _two_ such entities; that the concept of Energy supplies all
her requirements; and that the employment of that conception obviates
the very serious contradictions which are involved in any assumption of
a real entity of the nature of Matter as ordinarily understood--a
conception of which the very description involves difficulties which
have perplexed thinking men for more than two centuries.

Our argument on this point involves consideration of the place occupied
by Energy in a potential form.

Whilst the transformability of Heat, Light, Sound, and other physical
phenomena in definite numerical ratios has led to their being all
regarded as actual manifestations of transmutations proceeding in one
real thing, occasionally there is a seeming break in the catena; no
phenomenon can be detected into which the heat or light or other
immediately preceding manifestation has been transformed; but, later on,
the co-relative reappears, and by an argument as strong as that which
asserts the continuous identity of an intelligence before, during, and
after a temporary suspension of consciousness, the student of Physics
maintains the continued existence _in posse_, if not _in esse_, of the
Energy which by appropriate action he can again reveal in an active or
kinetic manifestation. Hence arises the conception of potential Energy.
The Energy to which we attribute the force of cohesion which any
particular body can on occasion manifest, we believe to exist
potentially whilst that body continues unacted upon. Our belief is
confirmed by our experience of the certainty with which, on the
recurrence of the given conditions, the force always again manifests
itself. In like manner the potential Energy to which we attribute the
Force of Gravitation we believe to exist at all times, even when not
kinetically active. Indeed, it only manifests itself when a
transmutation is taking place into some other form of Energy. Now it is
the universal association of these two forms of potential Energy with
the common and fundamental data of our sense-experience that has
suggested the construction in our minds of the conception of Matter, and
furnished us with the ideas of solidity, impenetrability, and weight
which constitute its groundwork.

Our view, therefore, is that the concept of materiality can, in the way
just indicated, be in all cases analysed into, and derived from, the
conception of Energy; and that Science, if consistent, cannot postulate
the reality of Matter as well. Potential Energy adequately supplies the
demand for a real substratum of which phenomena are the manifestation.

The whole question is very well worth the attention, not only of
scientific students but of metaphysicians. The inquiry will distinctly
gain if it receive the auxiliary attention of those who have studied the
process by which we form our mental conceptions, and whilst the students
of Physics deserve the honours of discovery, they cannot safely dispense
with such assistance, for which the present confused and inconsistent
state of the fundamental definitions of Physical Science most urgently
calls. There is here a neglected but very interesting field for the
metaphysician's efforts.

Recent scientific writings contain enough to show us that men of science
are already beginning to recognise not only the inconsistency of the
theory of two real things, but the dominating significance of the
conception of Energy, and are gradually coming to claim for the
conception of Matter little more than recognition as the vehicle of
energetic transmutation. Let us then for the moment accept the position
that Science--ridding itself of redundant theory--postulates Energy as
the real thing-in-itself, in terms of which it frames its statement of
physical phenomena, and let us examine briefly the effects which the
acceptance of this new postulate is likely to have on philosophic
speculation.

All my Presentment, all the content of my sense-experience, according to
this theory, I attribute to a multifarious continuous series of
transmutations constantly proceeding in some portion of the system of
Energy which constitutes the real substratum of phenomena. I study,
measure, and classify the different species of these transmutations; I
associate particular sensations and classes of sensations with
particular transmutations, and I thence infer the existence _in posse_
or _in esse_ of more or less Energy in some particular form transmuting
itself according to some one or other definite physical law. I infer
also the existence of various supplies of potential Energy constantly
available, and of other intelligent agents like myself.

I associate every such intelligent agent with a particular series or
group of sense-experiences, and further I assume that the world at his
Presentment, consists for him in a similar series of transmutations
continuously going on in that portion of the energetic system which I
believe in a similar way to constitute such person's bodily organism.
Thus by the same process of reasoning by which I am led to believe that
my own Presentment consists in the energetic transmutations proceeding
in my organism, I explain the universality of the experience of all
intelligent agents. In my own case, by that union of consciousness with
physical energy which accompanies the manifestation of life, I am
immediately related with that portion of the energetic system which is
the real substratum of my organism, and am made conscious of the series
of transmutations occurring at that particular point in it which is
represented by my sensory system. In the case of others, from certain of
the transmutations occurring in my Presentment, I am led to infer the
existence of other similar microcosmic systems in the energetic
macrocosm of the physical universe.

This is all very well as a theory, but if all I know is the series of
transmutations occurring in the portion of the system of Energy related
directly to my intelligence, how did I ever learn to infer from these
transmutations the existence of that Energy underlying them, and still
more of the whole energetic system extending far beyond my organism? How
do I deduce from transmutations proceeding in the portion of the
energetic system which constitutes the real substratum of my organism
the existence, not only of that substratum itself, but of other portions
of the system similarly related to other intelligences, and of the
energetic system as a whole? How do I get beyond my Presentment? How
pass from Ideality to Existence?

I answer that I never could by any chance or possibility have got beyond
it or got any suggestion of the Reality had I been merely related to my
Presentment as a passive and percipient subject. In point of fact,
however, I am in relation with the energetic system not merely or
primarily as an Intelligence percipient of the transmutations proceeding
in it at a particular point, but also as a Will initiative to some
extent of such transmutations and capable of influencing and directing
the physical process. Life necessarily involves a process of energetic
transmutation constantly proceeding at that portion of the system of
Energy which constitutes my organism, and I am there related as Will
with a larger system which embraces the part in which intelligence is
developed.

Fundamentally, life manifests itself in all grades of the zoologic
hierarchy as a union of Volition (or what appears in action as Volition)
with some particular point in the universe of physical Energy, the union
constituting what we call a living organism.

Despite its profound importance to us personally and to our race, we
should not forget that, objectively considered, the brain in man and the
higher animals is merely a special organ highly developed by use, as
the trunk is in the elephant, the middle phalanx in the horse, or wings
in the bird. Intelligence is hardly to any extent a necessity of the
vital union of the Will with the energetic system. It is not at all
developed in the vegetal kingdom, hardly at all in some branches of the
animal, and there may conceivably be an infinite number of other
"kingdoms" in which it may be either undeveloped, or very differently
developed, or superseded by some other manifestation by us unimaginable.
Its development indeed seems to be concurrent with the development of a
locomotive faculty--a striking confirmation of the theory that it is in
our activity that we derive the suggestions which call forth the
exercise of the Understanding and transform sensation into perception.

It is only with a comparative fraction of the organism that I am related
as a passively percipient intelligence. I am directly or indirectly
related as Will, as an originative cause of activity, with a larger
portion of my organism, many parts of which are quite distinct from the
cognitive portion. Now it is from my relation as Will with Energy other
than and beyond the energetic transmutations which constitute my
Presentment that I discover the energetic system of Nature, as a real
thing--beyond, underlying, and by its transmutations constitutive of my
Presentment. Many of the transmutations which occur in my Presentment I
recognise as attributable to my own volitional activity operating upon
my energetic organism, and _in my own activity there is thus suggested
to me a source of phenomena lying beyond these phenomena themselves_. A
transmutation initiated in my brain is a pure idea. The key which
suggests to me the real world is the occurrence of transmutations
ascribable to my activity operating beyond the sphere which constitutes
my Presentment.

It is in this way that I originally discover the real energetic
substratum to the phenomenal world of my Presentment. I learn from the
transmutations to infer the agency and operation of the underlying
energy, and thus gradually construct my whole systematic conception of
the real world in which I live and move and have my being.

This view of my activity and of the consequences of my relation as Will
to the energetic system represented by my organism, including the
portion thereof related to my intelligence, supplies us therefore with a
key to the inevitable reference of thoughts to things.

I distinguish in my active experience a clear difference between wishing
and willing, and further between willing and effective action. My
Power--the Energy related to my Will--the exertion of which is
necessary to translate Volition into an overt result--is a limited and
quantifiable thing, but that such a hidden energetic medium or
substratum underlies all phenomena is evident from the fact that I do
not will directly the appearance of any given phenomenon. I may wish
that. But when the Volition is reached and the wish transformed into
overt exertion I find myself involved in the multifarious processes of
an energetic system which I may so far influence, but which is
nevertheless in many ways constantly going on irrespective of my
Volition. I may wish to avoid pain and may will certain exertions with
that view, but the consequences may be the reverse of what I wished.
This shows that the Volition operates immediately not on the sensation
but on the energetic system.

In all cases between Volition and overt result there seems to be erected
and constantly maintained around me a vast energetic system, a part but
only a small part of which, namely the Energy of my organism, can be
influenced directly by my Will, whilst, even in immediate relation with
that part, transmutations beyond the reach of my Will are constantly
going on. Indeed, what fundamentally distinguishes Volition from Desire
is its relation to the energetic system.

The doctrine of Energy therefore puts in a new and clearer light the
whole theory of Causation.

It is common for philosophers to talk of invariable sequence as the
criterion of Causality. But, in fact, that is quite fallacious. No one
ever regards a phenomenon as the cause of another phenomenon. We ascribe
Causality to the energetic transmutation which in some form or other we
inevitably believe to accompany the appearance of every phenomenon. We
never postulate a causal relation between day and night--the most
notable case of invariable sequence. When we say the fire warms the
room, or the horse draws the cart, or the sun ripens the corn, it is the
Energy which we rightly or wrongly associate with the visual sensation
referred to in the words "fire" and "horse" and "sun" of which we are
thinking, and by no means of these visual sensations themselves. As has
been well said, we never suppose that the leading carriage of the train
draws those behind it, although their relation of sequence is quite as
close to it as to the engine.

True, it is and must be from and by phenomena only that I infer and
measure the transmutations of Energy, but the transmutations measured
are operations of the real thing-in-itself postulated by Science. The
existence of such Energy is suggested to me primarily in my experience
of my own activity in which I recognise my power of doing work--a
quantifiable and measurable thing, homogeneous with the Energy in
respect of which Science states the relations and conditions of all
physical phenomena. My most incessant mental act is that by which, on
the analogy of my own active experience, I refer all phenomena to the
underlying energetic system. This reference it is which transforms
sensation into perception; and the constant affirmation of this
reference is the great function of the synthetic mental activity of the
understanding, and is at once the origin and explanation of that
imperative mental tendency which metaphysicians call the law of
Causality.

How, then, does this doctrine affect the theory of the nature of Space?

If it be true that the world as my Presentment consists in the
transmutations occurring in that particular part of the energetic system
which constitutes the real substratum of the brain, then phenomena as a
whole must arise in transmutation, in a process of Becoming rather than
in a state of Being, and Space must be the content, the condition, in
which that process proceeds. The laws of Space, therefore, are laws, so
to speak, of motion, not of position. The most absolutely still and
motionless visual presentation is really a series of constant
transmutations of Energy and the form of Space is constituted by the
laws of transmutation, which are thus at once the necessary conditions
of my perception and the universal conditions of all sense-perception.
Space, therefore, does not contain the real thing which sustains the
phenomenal world any more than it does the reality which underlies my
conscious self. It is the universal condition of the transmutations
which constitute phenomena; and it therefore "contains" all these
phenomena, including my body as phenomenon and only as phenomenon. Its
form is discovered by my organic motor activity, and in representing
this activity the mind constructs its concepts of Space and Extension.

This view of the nature of Space, by relating its forms and laws with
the objective, and a-logical thing-in-itself in virtue of the
transmutations of which our sense-experience occurs, relieves an obvious
difficulty which must always have been felt in accepting without
qualification the purely Kantian view which regarded it as a category
imposed by the Intelligence upon the otherwise unknowable world of
sense.

The most ardent assertors of the ideality of Space have hitherto
apparently had difficulty in avoiding the tendency to conceive it as the
persistent all-embracing objective content of the thing-in-itself, not
merely of the phenomenon, although the latter only might enter into
Knowledge. The doctrine, however, which presents our conception of Space
as discovered in our activity amid resistant transmutation-processes not
only establishes its ideality but at the same time explains the relation
which its form nevertheless bears to the objective material laws of the
sensible presentation. It liberates the mind from the oppressive
necessity of regarding Space as still somehow objectively extending and
containing the real world. It also relieves an obvious difficulty which
confronts the Philosophy of Schopenhauer in locating those
transcendental forms of the phenomenon which are imposed _a priori_ upon
the presentation, and yet are not to be found in the pure Volition.

Of course, it must never be forgotten that my whole sentient experience
consists primarily of the series of energetic transmutations occurring
at that part of the energetic system which is in immediate vital
relation with my consciousness. It is my experience of active exertion,
of moving, speaking, etc., which gives a suggestion of the real
energetic world. The transmutations of the real Energy of the world
beyond my organism never enter my Consciousness. Transmutations arising
beyond my body only enter the presentation by influencing the cerebral
process. The luminous undulation and the sound-wave must both produce
transmutation of the cerebral Energy in order to affect Consciousness.
Yet the various characters of the transmitted impulses are
distinguishable in the resultant cerebral transmutations. Thus I feel
sensations of hardness, roughness, pain, colour, sound, etc. It is by a
process of mental construction that I associate these with the forms of
my exertional activity, and thus frame my conceptions of real bodies in
the world around me--those which I more directly associate with the
Energy subject to my Volition being conceived as representing my body.
For reasons of convenience, I refer those conceptions chiefly to the
co-ordinated visual presentation, and thus build up my conception of the
extended world of material things. Science is possible because all
transmutations of Energy take place according to definite numerical laws
and ratios. The whole work of Science is to explain every phenomenon in
terms of its definite transmutation of Energy. These definite numerical
laws and processes are characteristic of all Energy transmutation, and
thus regulate the experience of every intelligent being. It is in virtue
of these that our separate systems of knowledge correspond, and that we
are thus presented each with corresponding aspects of one outer world.
The laws which regulate the cerebral changes that accompany
sense-presentation are for me the necessary _a priori_ laws of
perception. It is because these laws operate in common in all brains
that community of intercourse is possible amongst mankind. It is because
of the further fact that the whole of the transmutations of Energy which
constitute physical phenomena compose a numerically inter-related and
regulated system that Science and rational knowledge are possible to the
intellect of man. Our knowledge is what we are obliged to think and
assert regarding experience; but the universality of experience is not
explained merely by the common nature and general laws of Intelligence,
but depends also on the generality of the laws under which the
transmutations of Energy proceed.

We are now, therefore, by the aid of the doctrine of Energy, better able
than before to distinguish accurately between the Ideal and the Real as
contrasted elements in our experience.

My Presentment as a whole consists in the transmutation-processes--in
the sensations, feelings, perceptions, images, ideas--in short, in all
that is going on at the point where (I necessarily express myself in
terms of spatial relations, though in this connection these are
figurative) my sentience and intelligence are developed.

My whole Presentment is, therefore, in one sense subjective, or, as some
would say, ideal. For me, my Presentment is the impression produced on,
the condition established in, my Consciousness in virtue of what is
going on at this so-called point of contact.

What we mean, therefore, by the subjectivity or ideality of the
Presentment is the aspect of energetic transmutations when viewed as
affecting my Consciousness in contrast with their obverse aspect when
viewed as transmutations in the objective system. As my Presentment,
they are all subjective or ideal, and it is in this reference that
Berkeley and Hume, for instance, speak of ideas of sense, such as the
colour blue, the heat of the fire, the pain of a blow. These,
constituting the bulk of the Presentment, they distinguish from what
Berkeley called ideas of the imagination--those stimulated or
originated, or, as he said, "excited," by the intelligence itself.
Whilst he contended that both classes are ideal or subjective, in
respect that they are constituents of the Presentment, the latter have
an additional title to subjectivity in respect of their origin, and
constitute what are called "ideas" when the word is used in
contra-distinction to "sensations"--such pure ideas occurring in
response to a subjective impulse.

On the other hand, there is a sense in which the Presentment is, if not
real, at least actual and objective.

So far as we know, Intelligence never develops except in conjunction
with an organism--that is, in vital relation with physical Energy. My
Presentment is constituted by the occurrence and depends upon the
continuance of the transmutations or operations proceeding at the
related point in the energetic system. Even pure ideas, though
subjective not only in regard to aspect but in regard to their origin,
are objective in respect that they also consist in an energetic
transmutation.

Herein lies the germ of truth to be discovered even in the unintelligent
dogmatism of those philosophers who assert the absolute Reality of my
Presentment, as such--not merely its actuality. It is comparatively
seldom, however, either in Science or Philosophy, that we meet a thinker
prepared to go as far as that. Most take refuge in a distinction between
primary and secondary qualities of bodies, classing my sensations as
non-resembling secondary qualities, which they admit cannot be conceived
to exist without the mind in the form in which they make up my
Presentment, but reserving five or six primary qualities--solidity,
extension, figure, motion, rest--which they conceive to exist
independently, just as they enter into my Presentment. In point of fact,
however, these so-called primary qualities are not the names of
intuitions, but are abstractions or generalisations of the most general
and necessary elements of my active Experience by reference to which I
mentally construct my world. The transmutations of Energy are not a
never-repeated accidental kaleidoscope. They proceed according to
constant, definite, measurable laws, and though subordinate variations
are infinite and make up the details of my Presentment, the general laws
and conditions according to which all Energy transmutes are definite,
and constitute the general features or qualities of my Experience, and
these are the so-called primary qualities of bodies regarded in the
light of the doctrine of Energy.

The primary quality of extension, in particular, is a conception
resulting from the association of my visual Presentment with my power of
active exertion, and the delusive tendency to regard this quality as in
some sense primarily and fundamentally real is due to the unconscious
recognition of the fact that it is in virtue of my power, or association
as an agent with the energetic system, that I derive a suggestion of the
real world beyond the phenomena which constitute my experience.

I cannot exist without some development of activity. Hence are derived
my conceptions of free space and of resistance between bodies. My
primary sensations are the sensations of touch, and the primary impulse
of thought is to relate these with my active exertions. When sight is
first restored to the blind the first impulse is to regard the new
sensation as a form of touch. Its intellectual suggestiveness is a
development. The system or stream of transmutations in which my
volitional activity principally takes part is that represented by the
operation of the forces of Gravitation and Cohesion; the system which
influences my visual sensations is a quite different series. The changes
in this latter series, by their greater rapidity, enable me to
anticipate the other series, and for this and other reasons I employ
these sensations to signalise and symbolise the transmutations
proceeding in the series with which I am more immediately related as an
active and "willing" agent. All transmutations, if they result in
sensations, must do so by producing changes in the Energy of my
organism, and must therefore be conditioned by the general laws which
regulate the changes which occur there, or, in other words, must be
contained within a self-consistent spatial condition; but the
differences in the characters of visual Space, as it is called, and the
spatial content of my activity, reflect the differences in the series of
energetic transmutations with which they are respectively connected.

We see more clearly, therefore, with the aid of the doctrine of Energy,
the import of the theory of transcendental æsthetic enunciated by Kant,
who first pointed out that there are elements, and those the most
necessary and universal, in the sense-presentation which bear the
character of ideality as fully as the most subjective efforts of our
ideative activity. More particularly do we illustrate the ideality of
Space as a cognition precedent to experience. It is because general laws
constantly operative regulate the transmutations which constitute the
individual's Presentment that it is possible for him to abstract from
and generalise the data of sense; and it is because the subjective
process of Ideation, by which we mean our representative mental activity
in its widest sense, consists also in transmutations under the same
general laws of the same portion of the energetic organism, that it is
possible to frame general ideas. These general laws of organic
transmutation are the _a priori_ conditions of the necessary
determination in time of all existences in the world of phenomena.

The form, therefore, of the phenomenon, in the language of Kant, is
constituted by the transmutations of the Energy immediately related to
consciousness; the matter of the phenomenon is constituted by the
varieties produced in these by the transmitted transmutations from the
Energy beyond--just as the musician may produce a constant variety of
harmonies upon his instrument, but all must be conditioned by the
relations fixed and established between the notes of which the
instrument is composed. Transmutations of the cerebral Energy may be
stimulated not only from without, but by subjective impulse from within;
but in either case the laws of these transmutations are the necessary
form of experience, and it is the possibility of transmutation upon an
internal and subjective impulse which makes possible the formation of
synthetical judgments _a priori_. It is as if the organ were not only
responsive to impressions upon its keyboard from without, but were also
automotive and could originate harmonies in its own notes; and as if,
moreover, it were endowed with consciousness so as to receive an
intuition of both classes of music. The former would correspond to
sensations, the latter to ideas; and we might imagine such an instrument
by presenting to itself its own system of notes, contriving thus to
frame _a priori_ a synthetical system of these general musical laws
which would constitute the necessary and universal form of its whole
musical experience. To complete the perhaps fantastic analogy we must
imagine the world to be one co-ordinated musical system, and our
instrument to be endowed with the power of playing upon the other
keyboards; of thence deriving the suggestion of the distinction between
the internal and external impulses which respectively awakened harmonies
within itself; and lastly, of thus at length conceiving in the spirit of
science that the necessary and universal laws which it recognised as the
most subjective and fundamental conditions of its own operation, at the
same time regulated the activity of the entire musical universe.

How natural it would be for such an intelligent musical instrument, if
unhappily endowed with common sense, to believe and assert that the real
substance of the universe consisted solely of sounds. Yet how evident
would it be to us from our standpoint of more absolute knowledge that
the whole orchestra of sounds, although actual and quite distinct from
consciousness, was still merely phenomenal, and yet withal, in its every
expression, revealed the laws and structure of reality--of the system of
things in themselves--a system the reality of which was dissimilar to
those appearances, though all its laws and structure could be studied
and derived from them.

Berkeley, therefore, erred seriously when he described the idea as a
fainter sensation. Faint subjective reproductions of our sensations, as
of blue, green, or the like, constitute a very insignificant element in
our mental furniture. We seldom pursue so far into detail the ideative
effort. Severely and effectively as Berkeley criticised Locke's account
of abstract ideas, the fact remains that abstraction is a primary
feature of our whole conceptual system; and the abstractable elements of
the sensible presentation being the necessary constituents of all
ideative representation are properly denominated ideal. The one element
of particularity which every idea lacks is the reference to the
transmitted transmutation to which the sensible phenomenon owes its
origin. We derive such reference to the external solely from the
obstructions which our free activity encounters and without which we
could receive no suggestion of the non-ego, and in particular no
suggestion of the dynamic element which fundamentally distinguishes
things from thoughts. The empirical content of experience--the so-called
secondary qualities of bodies--are often called in their subjective
aspect "ideal" because the mental impression is obviously very
different from the transmutation objectively regarded. But this is to
confound the ideal with the subjective, which latter term is that
properly applicable both to the sensible impression and to purely mental
activity. The primary qualities, being the general laws or forms of
organic Energy-transmutation, are in a higher sense ideal, for they are
the necessary conditions under which both sense-presentation and
ideative representation proceed. Whilst, therefore, as Kant maintained,
they are the _a priori_ element in perception, they at the same time
constitute the laws which regulate all Energy-transmutation within our
experience both organic and extra-organic.

We hold, therefore, to the Platonic doctrine that whilst, on the one
hand, the sensible is only an object of thought in so far as it partakes
of the intelligible, on the other hand the idea is not only a type for
the individual mind, but is partaker also of the laws which penetrate
the system of things. Idealism as a Philosophy, in denying the validity
of any reference of the content of the Presentment to a further
existence outside of the subjective experience, has induced that wider
use of the term idea which applies it to the whole actuality of
experience in its subjective aspect. With the advance of Philosophy we
must revert to that more ancient use of the term idea which confines
its extension into the realm of the perceptual to those elements of the
sensible presentation which can be reproduced by the conceptual activity
of the subject, and which in asserting, for instance, the ideality of
Space, reminds us at the same time that Ideality implies not merely
subjectivity, but the expression or representation also of some aspect
of those laws which regulate the system of Reality.

But is not common sense right, after all? Do I really mean to say that
tables, chairs, houses, mountains--the whole world of my Presentment,
are to be regarded as shrivelled up and located in my brain, or in the
energetic correlative of my brain? Is the whole Universe, as known to me
or conceived by me, contained within a minute portion of itself--the
brain? Now Science does say something very like this, and the logical
difficulties of the position are very pressing. But they cannot be got
over by attempting to revert to common sense, because to assert that all
my conceived Universe is immediately perceived by me as it exists, would
seem to involve a diffusion of my intelligence throughout Space which is
still more inconceivable and self-contradictory. Even apart from this
implication, the assumption of the Reality of the phenomenal world
destroys itself. To assume the reality of so-called material particles
is to lay the foundation of an argument which surely leads to the
conclusion that the whole world of my consciousness is produced by and
consists in motions in that certain small group of these same molecules
which is assumed to make up my brain. The solution is only reached when
we discover that the error lies in forgetting that the Reality which is
the seat of my Presentment is itself unperceived, and that what I
commonly call a body and a brain are the phenomena occurring in my
Presentment, and which I associate with such real substratum. The real
substratum of my Presentment is a part of the energetic Universe, which
is constantly undergoing transmutations. Wherever such Energy is united,
in an organism, with consciousness these transmutations, as affecting
and perceived by such consciousness, constitute its Presentment or
sense-experience; and aided by the constructive activity of thought
expand, as it were, subjectively into a whole world of experience, as
the electric current vibrating darkly along the narrow confines of the
wire suddenly expands at the carbon point into the luminous undulations
which light a city.

We admit, therefore, to the full the actuality and objectivity of the
sensible presentation. We only deny that it is the real thing-in-itself.
The latter is not discovered by sense. My energetic organism is like a
well-fitting garment; I do not feel it at all. I feel only changes or
transmutations taking place in it. Be not alarmed, therefore, for your
common-sense world. We leave it to you intact and actual--not deducting
even a single primary quality. Allowing fully for the extent to which,
little suspected by you, it is a mentally constructed system, its
elements are still actual and objective; they are modes of Reality;
extension and the other primary qualities are qualities of these modes.
Moreover, the Ego, I, myself, as Will, as a continuously identic
intelligent agent, am not given to myself immediately in my Presentment,
any more than is the real object. The existence of my Ego, of my
cogitant self, is an inference which I am compelled to draw from the
facts of my mental activity. _Cogito, ergo sum._ Similarly, my energetic
organism is the real a-logical thing-in-itself which I am compelled to
postulate in order to explain my perception of physical phenomena in the
light of my physical activity; _ago, ergo possum_.

We must not overlook the unique position in our Presentment occupied by
the visual presentation. Its universality, simultaneousness, minute
accuracy, quantifiability, etc., are such that it is really to the
visual Presentment that I refer all other elements in my
sense-experience. I think of them with reference to it. In connection
with it I mentally construct my world. I associate with some
modification of the visual presentation the phenomena resultant upon the
energetic activity of my own organism, and the other forces and
potential Energies which that activity reveals and suggests. It is thus
that I derive the compound idea of Body as consisting of Figure,
Extension, and Solidity. The continued appearance in my visual
presentation of the grey colour which I am now seeing is to me the sign
of the continued persistence of that potential Energy in virtue of which
I regard it as the appearance of a solid extended stone wall. Everything
is referred to the visual presentation, and it is in reference to it
that the mind works in constructing its world.

The whole theory of molecular action is a theory constructed in
reference to the visual presentation--the reality of which, strangely,
it seems to result in overthrowing. A born-blind man could never have
invented the conception of atoms or molecules. This is well worth
thinking over. The visual presentation is not really fundamental; and we
must undo the inversion induced by its great convenience whereby we
refer to it all the other elements of our sense-experience and conceive
of our activity and our whole actual world by reference to the visible
sign. It is in consequence of this reference to the visual that bodies
are thought of as discrete units, so that it is difficult to conceive
that the real thing in virtue of which we experience the perception of,
say, a heap of stones, is truly more or less potential Energy--just as
the continuous process of thought is very different from the disparate
symbols of speech.

I habitually refer to the visual extended image as the primary basis of
my idea of the world, or of any particular part of the world, such as my
dining-room. Why? Simply because, for the reasons already noted, the
sense of sight is the sense of universal reference. In principle it is
the same habitual tendency which makes me associate every element of my
world with its appropriate name. It is different in the case of other
sensations. When I am absent from Niagara I do not, in thinking of it,
primarily conceive of it as a roar of sound. I think of certain motions
of mass which, if I were present, would occasion the subjective
sensations of sound. But for the habitual tendency arising from the
universal reference to the visible I would do the same in the case of
the visual image. All I am necessitated to think is a real event--a
real, physical, dynamical transmutation--proceeding quite independently
of my perception or presence; and if I can only manage to realise that I
must, for philosophical purposes, eliminate my reference to visual as
well as to audible or other sensations, I will understand that all I am
entitled to, and all I can, without hopeless contradiction, postulate as
real thing existing independently of my perception, is a transmutation
of Energy. This energy is imperceptible, unextended, unfigured, yet it
is by no means a mere logical or mental necessity or associative
tendency. On the contrary, it is very real. It sustains my every act. By
an imperative mental necessity I am obliged, by inference from my
experiences as an active and percipient agent, to postulate the
energetic system in which I am involved, and with one particular centre
in which I am organically related.

But we recall at this point that Science says she must still postulate
Matter as the vehicle of Energy. But what does that mean except that the
subject of her studies is the sensible presentation which itself
consists of energy transmutation in part constantly changing but with
relatively permanent and recurrent elements? These more permanent
elements constitute what we call bodies. If the sensible presentation
consisted exclusively of one continuous, unchanging phenomenon, Reason
would never be stimulated, and Personality, Cause, Power would never
have been postulated or conceived. But the transmutation is constantly
"accelerated"--incessantly fluctuates and varies. Certain of these
variations I recognise as related to my own volitional activity, and I
am thus furnished with a key which enables me, by a sympathetic analogy,
to attribute all the changes in my experience to various agents, each
related to the other by the intervention of this system of physical
Energy. Some of these I can further trace to the initiative of Volition
of myself or other persons; others I can only recognise as integral
parts of the vast energetic system of Nature, the stimulus of which I
cannot follow further.

The reality of Matter is said to be proved by its indestructibility; but
this characteristic can easily be resolved into (1) the
indestructibility of Space and Extension which we have seen to be merely
another name for the necessity or inevitable universality of the general
laws and conditions of Energy transmutation, and (2) the
indestructibility of the Energy to the transmutations of which we
attribute the forces of Cohesion and Gravitation.

All vital activity is but a producing of changes in the stream of
transmutation. We never do, nor in the nature of things do we ever try
to, increase or diminish the quantity of the real Energy itself. We
instinctively recognise the objective source of our physical power, and
this has led some thinkers to suppose that the indestructibility of
Matter is an _a priori_ datum of thought. But such a belief is quite
unfounded. All it amounts to is a recognition that the destruction of
Matter is _beyond our power_--a necessary consequence of the fact that
we merely act upon the transmutation-process. Many a long contest
between the supporters of _a priori_ and experiential knowledge can be
set at rest by this view of the mediating functions of the energetic
organism.

The reflections which we have thus briefly noted and illustrated open a
wide field for inquiry. The scientific doctrine of Energy would seem to
be pregnant with momentous consequences for Philosophy, and it is worth
while for metaphysicians to devote to this subject the deepest and most
deliberate thought. The results cannot easily be grasped by a mere
cursory perusal of memoranda, in which we have only sketched a few
salient aspects of the doctrine. We deprecate unwarrantable assurance,
and are fully conscious of the difficulty of adequately expressing
thought on such a theme; but we have not written rashly nor without
good grounds for asking attention.

Science, it seems to us, postulates in Energy an a-logical, unextended,
real thing-in-itself in terms of which the phenomena of Physics can be
adequately and quantifiably stated. At the same time it furnishes
Philosophy with a theory of the objectively real thing-in-itself which
satisfied those necessities of thought by which we are constrained to
interpret our sense-experience by a constant reference to a Reality
beyond it--a necessity due to our association as Actors with an Energy
beyond that which is the seat of our Presentment. Such a view avoids the
incurable difficulties and contradictions involved in the theory of the
reality of extended material substance, or in any theory, indeed, which
asserts the reality--as presented--of the sensible presentation.
Physical Reality thus conceived is consistently thinkable as co-existent
with the thing-in-itself--be it ultimately Intelligence or Volition--of
which our cognitive and conative existence is a manifestation. And such
a doctrine, by explaining all phenomena as transmutations proceeding
(according to the definite mathematical laws prevailing throughout the
whole Universe of Energy) at that point in the system which is
organically related to Consciousness, accounts at once for the apparent
apriority and necessity of the qualities of Space, and at the same time
for their evident universality and objectivity.

In a word, it would rather seem as if Science, unconscious of its
pregnant possibilities, has not only formulated a theory which
co-ordinates and unifies the entire fabric of physical knowledge, but
has also at length furnished Philosophy with the key to that problem the
solution of which has, in the words of Schopenhauer, been the main
endeavour of philosophers for more than two centuries, namely, to
separate by a correctly drawn line of cleavage the Ideal--that which
belongs to our knowledge as such--from the Real, that which exists
independently of us; and thus to determine the relation of each to the
other.

To us it seems not strange that Philosophy should in the end be indebted
to Science for this solution--nor should Science, in the hour of her
greatest speculative victory, object too hastily to the assistance which
the thinker, trained to the study of the process of thought, can render
in clarifying and restating in its metaphysical aspects a theory which,
if profoundly conceived, and formulated by men of science from Rumford
and Davy to Stewart, Tait, and Kelvin, was partially anticipated by the
metaphysician who conceived the world as will and idea.

We maintain, therefore, that the presentation of sense, the continuum
or manifold, or what you will, consists in the transmutations of a real
substance itself unextended and unperceived; that the laws of these
transmutations are what constitute the geometric all-containing Space;
that at a point in this real energetic system organically related to the
intelligent self, the transmutations occurring there constitute the
individual's sensible experience; that his mind, by also actively
influencing the system at that point, can stimulate the train of
transmutations which constitute his world of ideas; that the mind can
discover itself as Will influencing transmutations in the organism which
are transmitted through a wider, larger portion of the system; and can
recognise the transmutations at the related point as influenced
sometimes by its own Volition and sometimes by other agents. We seek to
bring the added light of scientific theory to reconcile the conflict
between the law and the fact, between the objects of reflection and the
objects of sense, between the world of thought and the world of
phenomena,--the problem which Plato raised and which has since been the
central problem of Metaphysics. In doing so we present a doctrine which
not only maintains the truth of the Ideal, and the actuality of the
phenomenal, and the relative reality of both, but which proves, with
all the cogency of Science, how it is that the Sensible is permeated by
and made knowable only by the Ideal, by the laws of the transmutations
which constitute actuality, and that, on the other hand, the Ideal only
enters experience as the regulative principle of the ever-transmuting
Reality.

The world consists not merely of phenomena, nor of phenomena and laws
which regulate them. These are but transitional and imperfect aspects of
Reality. "Our standard of Truth and Reality," says a recent writer,
"moves us on towards an individual with laws of its own, and to laws
which form the vital substance of a single existence." We approach such
a goal in the conception of Energy--the laws of whose constant
transmutations are what we call Nature.

We must distinguish Energy as Absolute Reality from such conceptions as
Activity, which is its subjective aspect, or as Force, which is really
the rate at which Energy is, in certain cases, transformed. Dynamics,
which investigates Force, is a study of the fundamental transmutations
of Energy. It postulates Energy as the Real Entity in terms of which it
can frame a satisfactory theory of dynamical phenomena.

The metaphysical labours of the century which has elapsed since Kant
have not been altogether in vain. The deeper thinkers are pretty nearly
agreed that the Absolute is not to be identified with its appearances.
How far they can bring home this view in practical form to the
intelligence of man is another matter. Plato doubtless saw the truth in
a sort of beatific vision, but the tide of speculation ebbed after his
death, and its healing waters never inundated the deserts of mediæval
thought. The discursive weakness in which the speculation of the
transcendental Philosophy seems to dissipate itself makes us fear a
similar decline. Metaphysics must receive the assistance of the great
speculative achievement of Physics. It must realise that Science can
postulate a Reality unperceived and unqualified by the conditions of
sense, but in terms of which Science can explain the whole phenomena of
the sensible presentation in their objective aspect,--explain these as
transmutations of Reality, proceeding in accordance with the general
mathematical laws under which Reality transmutes itself.

It may be said that reason requires us to think that the Universe is a
unity. Where do you embrace within Reality, in such a view of it,
Intelligence, Volition, Feeling? We answer: Of course, obviously
Reality, as postulated by Physics, does not contain these. But the Real
Thing postulated by Physics is but one aspect of the whole, and may be,
must be, merged in a higher Reality--of which phenomena, on the one
hand, and Thought, Conation, Feeling on the other, are the appearances.
That involves a further advance, the attainment of a higher degree of
Truth which would bridge the Dualism of Thought and Existence, of Self
and Not-self, of Spirit and Nature, and whilst, on the one hand, such
Reality must fundamentally be a-logical, on the other hand Energy may
owe its energy to Spirit.

In the dualism which we must, in experience, recognise, we notice one
fundamental distinction: quantification, measurability, appear the
attributes of the physical; quality, ideality, of the spiritual. The
apprehension, therefore, of the doctrine of Energy should accomplish in
clarity and security the abolition of the intolerable contradictions
which have hitherto involved the search for Reality amid its
appearances. We think it suggests the most satisfying explanation of the
distinction which separates, and the principle which relates Ideality
and Externality, and should obviate the almost childish efforts of
transcendentalists to expound the relation of the Mind to a body which
is involved in, and which is yet--for the individual--distinguished,
they cannot tell us how, from the whole system of Nature.

Of course, neither Thought nor Volition, as such, can be the absolute
Reality. They, like Physical Force, are but transmutations, affections,
phases of Reality. Nor, again, is Energy, as a quality, a correct
description of the Absolute, as such. The Absolute, as such, we cannot
describe; but in studying, as Physics does, the relations of physical
phenomena and stating these in terms of Reality, it conveniently gives
Reality a name appropriate to its own standpoint.

Metaphysics rightly declines to be required to study special branches of
Science. Nothing but grotesque absurdity ensues when this precaution is
overlooked. Yet Metaphysics has hitherto thought itself the better of a
little logic, and in the future it will have to grasp the scientific
conception of Reality. There is nothing else for it; and, after all, it
is remarkable how far the most fundamental conceptions of Metaphysics
are dependent on a physical origin.

Surely it is of primary importance to realise the effect upon our
conceptions of Space and Extension of the doctrine of the transmutations
of Energy. Even the profoundest metaphysicians have seemingly failed to
explain how Space, Matter, and Extension are related with Reality. You
cannot ignore this difficulty by saying that these are the working
conceptions of particular branches of Physical Science. But when you
realise that physical phenomena, even the most permanent and rigid, are
by scientific demonstration but transmutations of the real thing, you
may then understand that Space, Body, and Extension are but the laws and
conditions of the process. As appearances, and within the realm of
phenomena, they seem still what they have always seemed. So much we
still concede without diminution or obscurity; and at the same time we
can harmonise them as they could never be harmonised before with
postulated Reality.

It is the same with Time. The facts of memory would seem to imply that
there is no succession in the Absolute. We are always present at all
times of our life. In recollecting a past event we are contemplating no
mere image, but the actual past event itself. Our chronometry depends on
the annual motion of the Earth round the Sun. It has thus a purely
physical basis.

We might illustrate the application of the doctrine of Energy to every
department of Metaphysics. But such is not the object of the present
essay. We merely desire to indicate briefly some of the many aspects of
the theory, and if only we have been able to suggest a line of inquiry,
the primary object of this essay has been attained.

--------------------

The earliest writer who deserves to be called a psychologist is Hobbes;
and if we consider the time when he wrote, we cannot fail to be
surprised at what I may term his prevision of the most important results
which have now been established by science. He was the first clearly to
sound the note which has ever since constituted the bass, or fundamental
tone, of scientific thought. Let us listen to it through the clear
instrumentality of his own language:--

     'All the qualities called sensible are, in the object which causeth
     them, but so many motions of the matter by which it presseth on our
     organs diversely. Neither in us that are pressed are they anything
     else but divers motions; for motion produceth nothing but
     motion.... The cause of sense is the external body or object, which
     presseth the organ proper to each sense, either immediately, as in
     taste and touch, or mediately, as in hearing, seeing, and smelling;
     which pressure, by the mediation of the nerves, and other strings
     and membranes of the body, continued inwards to the brain and
     heart, causeth there a resistance, or counter-pressure, or
     endeavour.... And because _going_, _speaking_, and the like
     voluntary motions, depend always upon a precedent thought of
     _whither_, _which way_, and _what_; it is evident that the
     imagination [or idea] is the first internal beginning of all
     voluntary motion. And although unstudied men do not conceive any
     motion at all to be there, where the thing moved is invisible; or
     the space it is moved in is, for the shortness of it, insensible;
     yet that doth not hinder, but that such motions are. These small
     beginnings of motion, within the body of man, before they appear in
     walking, speaking, striking, and other visible actions, are
     commonly called ENDEAVOUR[1].'

These quotations are sufficient to show that the system of Hobbes was
prophetic of a revelation afterwards declared by two centuries of
scientific research. For they show how plainly he taught that all our
knowledge of the external world is a knowledge of motion; and, again,
that all our acquisitions of knowledge and other acts of mind themselves
imply, as he elsewhere says, some kind of 'motion, agitation, or
alteration, which worketh in the brain.' That he conceived such motion,
agitation, or alteration to be, from its extreme minuteness, 'invisible'
and 'insensible,' or, as we should now say, molecular, is likewise
evident. I can therefore imagine the delight with which he would hear me
speak when I say, that it is no longer a matter of keen-sighted
speculation, but a matter of carefully demonstrated fact, that all our
knowledge of the external world is nothing more than a knowledge of
motion. For all the forms of energy have now been proved to be but modes
of motion; and even matter, if not in its ultimate constitution vortical
motion, at all events is known to us only as changes of motion: all that
we perceive in what we call matter is change in modes of motion. We do
not even know what it is that moves; we only know that when some modes
of motion pass into other modes, we perceive what we understand by
matter. It would take me too long to justify this general statement so
that it should be intelligible to every one; but I am confident that all
persons who understand such subjects will, when they think about it,
accept this general statement as one which is universally true. And, if
so, they will agree with Hobbes that all our knowledge of the external
world is a knowledge of motion.

Now, if it would have been thus a joy to Hobbes to have heard to-day how
thoroughly he has been justified in his views touching the external
world, with no less joy would he have heard that he has been equally
justified in his views touching the internal world. For it has now been
proved, beyond the possibility of dispute, that it is only in virtue of
those invisible movements which he inferred that the nervous system is
enabled to perform its varied functions.

To many among the different kinds of movement going on in the external
world, the animal body is adapted to respond by its own movements as
best suits its own welfare; and the mechanism whereby this is effected
is the neuro-muscular system. Those kinds of movement going on in the
external world which are competent to evoke responsive movements in the
animal body are called by physiologists stimuli. When a stimulus falls
upon the appropriate sensory surface, a wave of molecular movement is
sent up the attached sensory nerve to a nerve-centre, which thereupon
issues another wave of molecular movement down a motor nerve to the
group of muscles over whose action it presides; and when the muscles
receive this wave of nervous influence they contract. This kind of
response to stimuli is purely mechanical, or non-mental, and is
ordinarily termed reflex action. The whole of the spinal cord and lower
part of the brain are made up of nerve-centres of reflex action; and, in
the result, we have a wonderfully perfect machine in the animal body
considered as a whole. For while the various sensory surfaces are
severally adapted to respond to different kinds of external
movement--the eye to light, the ear to sound, and so on--any of these
surfaces may be brought into suitable relation with any of the muscles
of the body by means of the cerebro-spinal nerve-centres and their
intercommunications.

So much, then, for the machinery of the body. We must now turn to
consider the corporeal seat of the mind, or the only part of the nervous
system wherein the agitation of nervous matter is accompanied with
consciousness. This is composed of a double nerve-centre, which occurs
in all vertebrated animals, and the two parts of which are called the
cerebral hemispheres. In man this double nerve-centre is so large that
it completely fills the arch of the skull, as far down as the level of
the eyebrows. The two hemispheres of which it consists meet face to face
in the middle line of the skull, from the top of the nose backwards.
Each hemisphere is composed of two conspicuously distinct parts, called
respectively the grey matter and the white matter. The grey matter is
external, enveloping the white matter like a skull-cap, and is composed
of an inconceivable number of nerve-cells connected together by
nerve-fibres. It is computed that in a human brain there cannot be less
than a thousand millions of cells, and five thousand millions of fibres.
The white matter is composed only of nerve-fibres, which pass downwards
in great strands of conducting tissue to the lower centres of the brain
and spinal cord. So that the whole constitutes one system, with the grey
matter of the cerebral hemispheres at the apex or crown.

That the grey matter of the cerebral hemispheres is the exclusive seat
of mind is proved in two ways. In the first place, if we look to the
animal kingdom as a whole, we find that, speaking generally, the
intelligence of species varies with the mass of this grey matter. Or, in
other words, we find that the process of mental evolution, on its
physical side, has consisted in the progressive development of this
grey matter superimposed upon the pre-existing nervous machinery, until
it has attained its latest and maximum growth in man.

In the second place, we find that when the grey matter is experimentally
removed from the brain of animals, the animals continue to live; but are
completely deprived of intelligence. All the lower nerve-centres
continue to perform their mechanical adjustments in response to suitable
stimulation; but they are no longer under the government of the mind.
Thus, for instance, when a bird is mutilated in this way, it will
continue to perform all its reflex adjustments--such as sitting on a
perch, using its wings when thrown into the air, and so forth; but it no
longer remembers its nest or its young, and will starve to death in the
midst of its food, unless it be fed artificially.

Again, if the grey matter of only one hemisphere be removed, the mind is
taken away from the corresponding (i. e. the opposite) side of the body,
while it remains intact on the other side. For example, if a dog be
deprived of one hemisphere, the eye which was supplied from it with
nerve-fibres continues able to see, or to transmit impressions to the
lower nerve-centre called the optic ganglion; for this eye will then
mechanically follow the hand waved in front of it. But if the hand
should hold a piece of meat, the dog will show no mental recognition of
the meat, which of course it will immediately seize if exposed to the
view of its other eye. The same thing is found to happen in the case of
birds: on the injured side _sensation_, or the power of responding to a
stimulus, remains intact; while _perception_, or the power of mental
recognition, is destroyed.

This description applies to the grey matter of the cerebral hemispheres
as a whole. But of course the question next arises whether it only acts
as a whole, or whether there is any localization of different
intellectual faculties in different parts of it. Now, in answer to this
question, it has long been known that the faculty of speech is
definitely localized in a part of the grey matter lying just behind the
forehead; for, when this part is injured, a man loses all power of
expressing even the most simple ideas in words, while the ideas
themselves remain as clear as ever. It is remarkable that in each
individual only this part of one hemisphere appears to be used; and
there is some evidence to show that left-handed persons use the opposite
side from right-handed. Moreover, when the side which is habitually in
use is destroyed, the corresponding part of the other hemisphere begins
to learn its work, so that the patient may in time recover his use of
language.

Within the last few years the important discovery has been made, that by
stimulating with electricity the surface of the grey matter of the
hemispheres, muscular movements are evoked; and that certain patches of
the grey matter, when thus stimulated, always throw into action the same
groups of muscles. In other words, there are definite local areas of
grey matter, which, when stimulated, throw into action definite groups
of muscles. The surface of the cerebral hemispheres has now been in
large measure explored and mapped out with reference to these so-called
motor-centres; and thus our knowledge of the neuro-muscular machinery of
the higher animals (including man) has been very greatly furthered. Here
I may observe parenthetically that, as the brain is insentient to
injuries inflicted upon its own substance, none of the experiments to
which I have alluded entail any suffering to the animals experimented
upon; and it is evident that the important information which has thus
been gained could not have been gained by any other method. I may also
observe that as these motor-centres occur in the grey matter of the
hemispheres, a strong probability arises that they are not only the
motor-centres, but also the volitional centres which originate the
intellectual commands for the contraction of this and that group of
muscles. Unfortunately we cannot interrogate an animal whether, when we
stimulate a motor-centre, we arouse in the animal's mind an act of will
to throw the corresponding group of muscles into action; but that these
motor-centres are really centres of volition is pointed to by the fact,
that electrical stimuli have no longer any effect upon them when the
mental faculties of the animal are suspended by anæsthetics, nor in the
case of young animals where the mental faculties have not yet been
sufficiently developed to admit of voluntary co-ordination among the
muscles which are concerned. On the whole, then, it is not improbable
that on stimulating artificially these motor-centres of the brain, a
physiologist is actually playing from without, and at his own pleasure,
upon the volitions of the animal.

Turning, now, from this brief description of the structure and leading
functions of the principal parts of the nervous system, I propose to
consider what we know about the molecular movements which go on in
different parts of this system, and which are concerned in all the
processes of reflex adjustment, sensation, perception, emotion,
instinct, thought, and volition.

First of all, the rate at which these molecular movements travel through
a nerve has been measured, and found to be about 100 feet per second, or
somewhat more than a mile a minute, in the nerves of a frog. In the
nerves of a mammal it is just about twice as fast; so that if London
were connected with New York by means of a mammalian nerve instead of an
electric cable, it would require nearly a whole day for a message to
pass.

Next, the time has also been measured which is required by a
nerve-centre to perform its part in a reflex action, where no thought or
consciousness is involved. This time, in the case of the winking reflex,
and apart from the time required for the passage of the molecular waves
up and down the sensory and motor nerves, is about 1/20 of a second.
Such is the rate at which a nerve-centre conducts its operations when no
consciousness or volition is involved. But when consciousness and
volition are involved, or when the cerebral hemispheres are called into
play, the time required is considerably greater. For the operations on
the part of the hemispheres which are comprised in perceiving a simple
sensation (such as an electrical shock) and the volitional act of
signalling the perception, cannot be performed in less than 1/12 of a
second, which is nearly twice as long as the time required by the lower
nerve-centres for the performance of a reflex action. Other experiments
prove that the more complex an act of perception, the more time is
required for its performance. Thus, when the experiment is made to
consist, not merely in signalling a perception, but in signalling one of
two or more perceptions (such as an electrical shock on one or other of
the two hands, which of five letters is suddenly exposed to view, &c.),
a longer time is required for the more complex process of distinguishing
which of the two or more expected stimuli is perceived, and in
determining which of the appropriate signals to make in response. The
time consumed by the cerebral hemispheres in meeting a 'dilemma' of this
kind is from 1/5 to 1/20 of a second longer than that which they consume
in the case of a simpler perception. Therefore, whenever mental
operations are concerned, a relatively much greater time is required for
a nerve-centre to perform its adjustments than when a merely mechanical
or non-mental response is needed; and the more complex the mental
operation the more time is necessary. Such may be termed the physiology
of deliberation.

So much, then, for the rate at which molecular movements travel through
nerves, and the times which nerve-centres consume in performing their
molecular adjustments. We may next consider the researches which have
been made within the last few months upon the rates of these movements
themselves, or the number of vibrations per second with which the
particles of nervous matter oscillate.

If, by means of a suitable apparatus, a muscle is made to record its own
contraction, we find that during all the time it is in contraction, it
is under-going a vibratory movement at the rate of about nine pulsations
per second. What is the meaning of this movement? The meaning is that
the act of will in the brain, which serves as a stimulus to the
contraction of the muscle, is accompanied by a vibratory movement in the
grey matter of the brain; that this movement is going on at the rate of
nine pulsations per second; and that the muscle is giving a separate or
distinct contraction in response to every one of these nervous
pulsations. That such is the true explanation of the rhythm in the
muscle is proved by the fact that if, instead of contracting a muscle by
an act of the will, it be contracted by means of a rapid series of
electrical shocks playing upon its attached nerve, the record then
furnished shows a similar trembling going on in the muscle as in the
previous case; but the tremors of contraction are now no longer at the
rate of nine per second: they correspond beat for beat with the
interruptions of the electrical current. That is to say, the muscle is
responding separately to every separate stimulus which it receives
through the nerve; and further experiment shows that it is able thus to
keep time with the separate shocks, even though these be made to follow
one another so rapidly as 1,000 per second. Therefore we can have no
doubt that the slow rhythm of nine per second under the influence of
volitional stimulation, represents the rate at which the muscle is
receiving so many separate impulses from the brain: the muscle is
keeping time with the molecular vibrations going on in the cerebral
hemispheres at the rate of nine beats per second. Careful tracings show
that this rate cannot be increased by increasing the strength of the
volitional stimulus; but some individuals--and those usually who are of
quickest intelligence--display a somewhat quicker rate of rhythm, which
may be as high as eleven per second. Moreover, it is found that by
stimulating with strychnine any of the centres of reflex action, pretty
nearly the same rate of rhythm is exhibited by the muscles thus thrown
into contraction; so that all the nerve-cells in the body are thus shown
to have in their vibrations pretty nearly the same period, and not to be
able to vibrate with any other. For no matter how rapidly the electrical
shocks are allowed to play upon the grey matter of the cerebral
hemispheres, as distinguished from the nerve-trunks proceeding from them
to the muscles, the muscles always show the same rhythm of about nine
beats per second: the nerve-cells, unlike the nerve-fibres, refuse to
keep time with the electric shocks, and will only respond to them by
vibrating at their own intrinsic rate of nine beats per second.

Thus much, then, for the rate of molecular vibration which goes on in
nerve-centres. But the rate of such vibration which goes on in sensory
and motor nerves may be very much more rapid. For while a nerve-centre
is only able to _originate_ a vibration at the rate of about nine beats
per second, a motor-nerve, as we have already seen, is able to
_transmit_ a vibration of at least 1,000 beats per second; and a sensory
nerve which at the surface of its expansion is able to respond
differently to differences of musical pitch, of temperature, and even of
colour, is probably able to vibrate very much more rapidly even than
this. We are not, indeed, entitled to conclude that the nerves of
special sense vibrate in actual unison, or synchronize, with these
external sources of stimulation; but we are, I think, bound to conclude
that they must vibrate in some numerical proportion to them (else we
should not perceive objective differences in sound, temperature, or
colour); and even this implies that they are probably able to vibrate at
some enormous rate.

With further reference to these molecular movements in sensory nerves,
the following important observation has been made--viz. that there is a
constant ratio between the amount of agitation produced in a sensory
nerve, and the intensity of the corresponding sensation. This ratio is
not a direct one. As Fechner states it, 'Sensation varies, not as the
stimulus, but as the logarithm of the stimulus.' Thus, for instance, if
1,000 candles are all throwing their light upon the same screen, we
should require ten more candles to be added before our eyes could
perceive any difference in the amount of illumination. But if we begin
with only 100 candles shining upon the screen, we should perceive an
increase in the illumination by adding a single candle. And what is true
of sight is equally true of all the other senses: if any stimulus is
increased, the smallest increase of sensation first occurs when the
stimulus rises one per cent, above its original intensity. Such being
the law on the side of sensation, suppose that we place upon the optic
nerve of an animal the wires proceeding from a delicate galvanometer, we
find that every time we stimulate the eye with light, the needle of the
galvanometer moves, showing electrical changes going on in the nerve,
caused by the molecular agitations. Now these electrical changes are
found to vary in intensity with the intensity of the light used as a
stimulus, and they do so very nearly in accordance with the law of
sensation just mentioned. So we say that in sensation the cerebral
hemispheres are, as it were, acting the part of galvanometers in
appreciating the amount of molecular change which is going on in sensory
nerves; and that they record their readings in the mind as faithfully as
a galvanometer records its readings on the dial.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hitherto we have been considering certain features in the physiology of
nervous action, so far as this can be appreciated by means of
physiological instruments. But we have just seen that the cerebral
hemispheres may themselves be regarded as such instruments, which record
in our minds their readings of changes going on in our nerves. Hence,
when other physiological instruments fail us, we may gain much
additional insight touching the movements of nervous matter by attending
to the thoughts and feelings of our own minds; for these are so many
indices of what is going on in the cerebral hemispheres. I therefore
propose next to contemplate the mind, considered thus as a physiological
instrument.

The same scientific instinct which led Hobbes so truly to anticipate the
progress of physiology, led him not less truly to anticipate the
progress of psychology. For just as he was the first to enunciate the
fundamental principle of nerve-action in the vibration of molecules, so
was he likewise the first to enunciate the fundamental principle of
psychology in the association of ideas. And the great advance of
knowledge which has been made since his day with respect to both these
principles, entitles us to be much more confident than even he was that
they are in some way intimately united. Moreover, the manner in which
they are so united we have begun clearly to understand. For we know from
our study of nerve-action in general, that when once a wave of invisible
or molecular movement passes through any line of nerve-structure, it
leaves behind it a change in the structure such that it is afterwards
more easy for a similar wave, when started from the same point, to
pursue the same course. Or, to adopt a simile from Hobbes, just as water
upon a table flows most readily in the lines which have been wetted by a
previous flow, so the invisible waves of nerve-action pass most readily
in the lines of a previous passage. This is the reason why in any
exercise requiring muscular co-ordination, or dexterity, 'practice makes
perfect:' the nerve-centres concerned learn to perform their work by
frequently repeating it, because in this way the needful lines of
wave-movement in the structure of the nerve-centre are rendered more and
more permeable by use. Now we have seen that in the nerve-centres called
the cerebral hemispheres, wave-movement of this kind is accompanied with
feeling. Changes of consciousness follow step by step these waves of
movement in the brain, and therefore when on two successive occasions
the waves of movement pursue the same pathway in the brain, they are
attended with a succession of the same ideas in the mind. Thus we see
that the tendency of ideas to _re_cur in the same order as that in
which they have previously _oc_curred, is merely an obverse expression
of the fact that lines of wave-movement in the brain become more and
more permeable by use. So it comes that a child can learn its lessons by
frequently repeating them; so it is that all our knowledge is
accumulated; and so it is that all our thinking is conducted.

A wholly new field of inquiry is thus opened up. By using our own
consciousness as a physiological instrument of the greatest delicacy, we
are able to learn a great deal about the dynamics of brain-action
concerning which we should otherwise remain in total ignorance. But the
field of inquiry thus opened up is too large for me to enter upon
to-day. I will therefore merely observe, in general terms, that although
we are still very far from understanding the operations of the brain in
thought, there can be no longer any question that in these operations of
the brain we have what I may term the objective machinery of thought.
'Not every thought to every thought succeeds indifferently,' said
Hobbes. Starting from this fact, modern physiology has clearly shown why
it is a fact; and looking to the astonishing rate at which the science
of physiology is now advancing, I think we may fairly expect that within
a time less remote than the two centuries which now separate us from
Hobbes, the course of ideas in a given train of thought will admit of
having its footsteps tracked in the corresponding pathways of the brain.
Be this, however, as it may, even now we know enough to say that,
whether or not these footsteps will ever admit of being thus tracked in
detail, they are all certainly present in the cerebral structures of
each one of us. What we know on the side of mind as logical sequence, is
on the side of the nervous system nothing more than a passage of nervous
energy through one series of cells and fibres rather than through
another: what we recognize as truth is merely the fact of the brain
vibrating in tune with Nature.

       *       *       *       *       *

Such being the intimate relation between nerve-action and mind-action,
it has become the scientifically orthodox teaching that the two stand to
one another in the relation of cause to effect. One of the most
distinguished of my predecessors in this place, the President of the
Royal Society, has said in one of the most celebrated of his
lectures:--'We have as much reason for regarding the mode of motion of
the nervous system as the cause of the state of consciousness, as we
have for regarding any event as the cause of another.' And, by way of
perfectly logical deduction from this statement, Professor Huxley argues
that thought and feeling have nothing whatever to do with determining
action: they are merely the bye-products of cerebration, or, as he
expresses it, the indices of changes which are going on in the brain.
Under this view we are all what he terms conscious automata, or machines
which happen, as it were by chance, to be conscious of some of their own
movements. But the consciousness is altogether adventitious, and bears
the same ineffectual relation to the activity of the brain as a
steam-whistle bears to the activity of a locomotive, or the striking of
a clock to the time-keeping adjustments of the clock-work. Here, again,
we meet with an echo of Hobbes, who opens his work on the Commonwealth
with these words:--

     'Nature, the art whereby God hath made and governs the world, is by
     the _art_ of man, as in many other things, in this also imitated,
     that it can make an artificial animal. For seeing life is but a
     motion of limbs, the beginning whereof is in the principal part
     within; why may we not say, that all _automata_ (engines that move
     themselves by springs and wheels as doth a watch), have an
     artificial life? For what is the _heart_, but a _spring_; and the
     _nerves_, but so many _strings_; and the _joints_, but so many
     _wheels_, giving motion to the whole body, such as was intended by
     the artificer[2]?'

Now, this theory of conscious automatism is not merely a legitimate
outcome of the theory that nervous changes are the causes of mental
changes, but it is logically the only possible outcome. Nor do I see any
way in which this theory can be fought on grounds of physiology. If we
persist in regarding the association between brain and thought
exclusively from a physiological point of view, we must of necessity be
materialists. Further, so far as we are physiologists our materialism
can do us no harm. On the contrary, it is to us of the utmost service,
as at once the simplest physiological explanation of facts already
known, and the best working hypothesis to guide us in our further
researches. But it does not follow from this that the theory of
materialism is true. The bells of St. Mary's over the way always ring
for a quarter of an hour before the University sermon; yet the ringing
of the bells is not the cause of the sermon, although, as long as the
association remains constant, there would be no harm in assuming, for
any practical purposes, that it is so. But just as we should be wrong in
concluding, if we did not happen to know so much about the matter as we
do, that the University sermon is produced by the vibration of bells in
the tower of St. Mary's Church, so we may be similarly wrong if we were
definitely to conclude that the sermon is produced by the vibration of a
number of little nerve-cells in the brain of the preacher.

Now, if time permitted, and if I supposed that you would all care to go
with me into matters of some abstruseness, I could certainly prove that
whatever the connexion between body and mind may be, we have the best
possible reasons for concluding that it is not a causal connexion. These
reasons are, of course, extra-physiological; but they are not on this
account less conclusive. Within the limits of a lecture, however, I can
only undertake to give an outline sketch of what I take to be the
overwhelming argument against materialism.

We have first the general fact that all our knowledge of motion, and so
of matter, is merely a knowledge of the modifications of mind. That is
to say, all our knowledge of the external world--including the knowledge
of our own brains--is merely a knowledge of our own mental states. Let
it be observed that we do not even require to go so far as the
irrefutable position of Berkeley, that the existence of an external
world without the medium of mind, or of being without knowing, is
inconceivable. It is enough to take our stand on a lower level of
abstraction, and to say that whether or not an external world can exist
apart from mind in any absolute or inconceivable sense, at any rate it
cannot do so _for us_. We cannot think any of the facts of external
nature without presupposing the existence of a mind which thinks them;
and therefore, so far at least as we are concerned, mind is necessarily
prior to everything else. It is for us the only mode of existence which
is real in its own right; and to it, as to a standard, all other modes
of existence which may be _in_ferred must be _re_ferred. Therefore, if
we say that mind is a function of motion, we are only saying, in
somewhat confused terminology, that mind is a function of itself.

Such, then, I take to be a general refutation of materialism. To use but
a mild epithet, we must conclude that the theory is unphilosophical,
seeing that it assumes one thing to be produced by another thing, in
spite of an obvious demonstration that the alleged effect is necessarily
prior to its cause. Such, I say, is a general refutation of
materialism. But this is far from being all. 'Motion,' says Hobbes,
'produceth nothing but motion;' and yet he immediately proceeds to
assume that in the case of the brain it produces, not only motion, but
mind. He was perfectly right in saying that with respect to its
movements the animal body resembles an engine or a watch; and if he had
been acquainted with the products of higher evolution in watch-making,
he might with full propriety have argued, for instance, that in the
compensating balance, whereby a watch adjusts its own movements in
adaptation to external changes of temperature, a watch is exhibiting the
mechanical aspect of volition. And, similarly, it is perhaps possible to
conceive that the principles of mechanism might be more and more
extended in their effects, until, in so marvellously perfected a
structure as the human brain, all the voluntary movements of the body
might be originated in the same mechanical manner as are the
compensating movements of a watch; for this, indeed, as we have seen, is
no more than happens in the case of all the nerve-centres other than the
cerebral hemispheres. If this were so, motion would be producing nothing
but motion, and upon the subject of brain-action there would be nothing
further to say. Without consciousness I should be delivering this
lecture; without consciousness you would be hearing it; and all the busy
brains in this University would be conducting their researches, or
preparing for their examinations, mindlessly. Strange as such a state
of things might be, still motion would be producing nothing but motion;
and, therefore, if there were any mind to contemplate the facts, it
would encounter no philosophical paradox: it would merely have to
conclude that such were the astonishing possibilities of mechanism. But,
as the facts actually stand, we find that this is not the case. We find,
indeed, that up to a certain level of complexity mechanism alone is able
to perform all the compensations or adjustments which are performed by
the animal body; but we also find that beyond this level such
compensations or adjustments are never performed without the
intervention of consciousness. Therefore, the theory of automatism has
to meet the unanswerable question--How is it that in the machinery of
the brain motion produces this something which is not motion? Science
has now definitely proved the correlation of all the forces; and this
means that if any kind of motion could produce anything else that is not
motion, it would be producing that which science would be bound to
regard as in the strictest sense of the word a miracle. Therefore, if we
are to take our stand upon science--and this is what materialism
professes to do--we are logically bound to conclude, not merely that the
evidence of causation from body to mind is not so cogent as that of
causation in any other case, but that in this particular case causation
may be proved, again in the strictest sense of the term, a physical
impossibility.

To adduce only one other consideration. Apart from all that I have said,
is it not in itself a strikingly suggestive fact that consciousness
only, yet always, appears upon the scene when the adjustive actions of
any animal body rise above the certain level of intricacy to which I
have alluded? Surely this large and general fact points with
irresistible force to the conclusion, that in the performance of these
more complex adjustments, consciousness--or the power of feeling and the
power of willing--is of some _use_. Assuredly on the principles of
evolution, which materialists at all events cannot afford to disregard,
it would be a wholly anomalous fact that so wide and important a class
of faculties as those of mind should have become developed in constantly
ascending degrees throughout the animal kingdom, if they were entirely
without use to animals. And, be it observed, this consideration holds
good whatever views we may happen to entertain upon the special theory
of natural selection. For the consideration stands upon the general fact
that all the organs and functions of animals are of use to animals: we
never meet, on any large or general scale, with organs and functions
which are wholly adventitious. Is it to be supposed that this general
principle fails just where its presence is most required, and that the
highest functions of the highest organs of the highest animals stand out
of analogy with all other functions in being themselves functionless? To
this question I, for one, can only answer, and answer unequivocally,
No. As a rational being who waits to take a wider view of the facts than
that which is open to the one line of research pursued by the
physiologist, I am forced to conclude that not without a reason does
mind exist in the frame of things; and that apart from the activity of
mind, whereby motion is related to that which is not motion, this planet
could never have held the wonderful being, who in multiplying has
replenished the earth and subdued it--holding dominion over the fish of
the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that
moveth.

What, then, shall we say touching this mysterious union of mind and
motion? Having found it physically impossible that there should be a
causal connexion proceeding from motion to mind, shall we try to reverse
the terms, and suppose a causal connexion proceeding from mind to
motion? This is the oldest and still the most popular theory--the theory
of spiritualism. And, no doubt, in one important respect it is less
unphilosophical than the opposite theory of materialism. For
spiritualism supposes the causation to proceed from that which is the
source of our idea of causality--the mind: not from that into which this
idea has been read--the brain. Therefore, if causation were to be
accepted as a possibility either way, it would be less unreasonable to
suppose mental changes the causes of material changes than _vice versâ_;
for we should then at least be starting from the basis of immediate
knowledge, instead of from the reflection of that knowledge in what we
call the external world. Seeing that the external world is known to us
only as motion, it is logically impossible for the mind to infer its own
causation from the external world; for this would be to infer that it is
an effect of motion, which would be the same as saying that it is an
effect of its own knowledge; and this would be absurd. But, on the other
hand, it is not thus logically impossible for the mind to infer that it
may be the cause of some of its own knowledge, or, in other words, that
it may have in some measure the power of producing what it knows as
motion. And when the mind does infer this, no logic on earth is able to
touch the inference; the position of pure idealism is beyond the reach
of argument. Nevertheless, it is opposed to the whole momentum of
science. For if mind is supposed, on no matter how small a scale, to be
a cause of motion, the fundamental axiom of science is impugned. This
fundamental axiom is that energy can neither be created nor
destroyed--that just as motion can produce nothing but motion, so,
conversely, motion can be produced by nothing but motion. Regarded,
therefore, from the stand-point of physical science, the theory of
spiritualism is in precisely the same case as the theory of materialism:
that is to say, if the supposed causation takes place, it can only be
supposed to do so by way of miracle.

And this is a conclusion which the more clear-sighted of the idealists
have expressly recognized. That subtle and most entertaining thinker,
for example, the late Professor Green of Oxford, has said that the
self-conscious volition of man 'does not consist in a series of natural
events, ... is not natural in the ordinary sense of that term; not
natural at any rate in any sense in which naturalness would imply its
determination by antecedent events, or by conditions of which it is not
itself the source.'

Thus the theory of spiritualism, although not directly refutable by any
process of logic, is certainly enfeebled by its collision with the
instincts of physical science. In necessarily holding the facts of
consciousness and volition super-natural, extra-natural, or non-natural,
the theory is opposed to the principle of continuity.

Spiritualism being thus unsatisfactory, and materialism impossible, is
there yet any third hypothesis in which we may hope to find intellectual
rest? In my opinion there is. If we unite in a higher synthesis the
elements both of spiritualism and of materialism, we obtain a product
which satisfies every fact of feeling on the one hand, and of
observation on the other. The manner in which this synthesis may be
effected is perfectly simple. We have only to suppose that the
antithesis between mind and motion--subject and object--is itself
phenomenal or apparent: not absolute or real. We have only to suppose
that the seeming duality is relative to our modes of apprehension; and,
therefore, that any change taking place in the mind, and any
corresponding change taking place in the brain, are really not two
changes, but one change. When a violin is played upon we hear a musical
sound, and at the same time we see a vibration of the strings.
Relatively to our consciousness, therefore, we have here two sets of
changes, which appear to be very different in kind; yet we know that in
an absolute sense they are one and the same: we know that the diversity
in consciousness is created only by the difference in our modes of
perceiving the same event--whether we see or whether we hear the
vibration of the strings. Similarly, we may suppose that a vibration of
nerve-strings and a process of thought are really one and the same
event, which is dual or diverse only in relation to our modes of
perceiving it.

The great advantage of this theory is that it supposes only one stream
of causation, in which both mind and motion are simultaneously
concerned. The theory, therefore, escapes all the difficulties and
contradictions with which both spiritualism and materialism are beset.
Thus, motion is supposed to be producing nothing but motion;
mind-changes nothing but mind-changes: both producing both
simultaneously, neither could be what it is without the other, because
without the other neither could be the cause which in fact it is.
Impossible, therefore, is the supposition of the materialist that
consciousness is adventitious, or that in the absence of mind changes
of brain could be what they are; for it belongs to the very causation of
these changes that they should have a mental side. The use of mind to
animals is thus rendered apparent; for intelligent volition is thus
shown to be a true cause of adjustive movement, in that the cerebration
which it involves could not otherwise be possible: the causation would
not otherwise be complete.

A simple illustration may serve at once to render this doctrine more
easily intelligible, and to show that, if accepted, the doctrine, as it
appears to me, terminates the otherwise interminable controversy on the
freedom of the will.

In an Edison lamp the light which is emitted from the burner may be said
indifferently to be caused by the number of vibrations per second going
on in the carbon, or by the temperature of the carbon; for this rate of
vibration could not take place in the carbon without constituting that
degree of temperature which affects our eyes as luminous. Similarly, a
train of thought may be said indifferently to be caused by brain-action
or by mind-action; for, _ex hypothesi_, the one could not take place
without the other. Now, when we contemplate the phenomena of volition by
themselves, it is as though we were contemplating the phenomena of light
by themselves: volition is produced by mind in brain, just as light is
produced by temperature in carbon. And just as we may correctly speak of
light as the cause, say, of a photograph, so we may correctly speak of
volition as the cause of bodily movement. That particular kind of
physical activity which takes place in the carbon could not take place
without the light which causes a photograph; and, similarly, that
particular kind of physical activity which takes place in the brain
could not take place without the volition which causes a bodily
movement. So that volition is as truly a cause of bodily movement as is
the physical activity of the brain; seeing that, in an absolute sense,
the cause is one and the same. But if we once clearly perceive that what
in a relative sense we know as volition is, in a similar sense, the
cause of bodily movement, we terminate the question touching the freedom
of the will. For this question in its last resort--and apart from the
ambiguity which has been thrown around it by some of our
metaphysicians--is merely the question whether the will is to be
regarded as a cause of Nature. And the theory which we have now before
us sanctions the doctrine that it may be so regarded, if only we
remember that its causal activity depends upon its identity with the
obverse aspect known as cerebration, without which identity in apparent
duality neither volition nor cerebration could be the cause which in
fact they are. It thus becomes a mere matter of phraseology whether we
speak of the will determining, or being determined by, changes going on
in the external world; just as it is but a matter of phraseology whether
we speak of temperature determining, or being determined by, molecular
vibration. All the requirements alike of the free-will and of the
bond-will hypotheses are thus satisfied by a synthesis which comprises
them both. On the one hand, it would be as impossible for an
_un_conscious automaton to do the work or to perform the adjustments of
a conscious agent, as it would be for an Edison lamp to give out light
and cause a photograph when not heated by an electric current. On the
other hand, it would be as impossible for the will to originate bodily
movement without the occurrence of a strictly physical process of
cerebration, as it would be for light to shine in an Edison lamp which
had been deprived of its carbon-burner.

It may be said of this theory that it is highly speculative, not
verifiable by any possible experiment, and therefore at best is but a
mere guess. All which is, no doubt, perfectly true; but, on the other
hand, we must remember that this theory comes to us as the only one
which is logically possible, and at the same time competent to satisfy
the facts alike of the outer and of the inner world. It is a speculation
in the sense of not being verifiable by experiment; but it has much more
value than ordinarily attaches to an unverifiable speculation, in that
there is really no alternative hypothesis to be considered: if we choose
to call it a guess, we must at the same time remember it is a guess
where it does not appear that any other is open. Once more to quote
Hobbes, who, as we have seen, was himself a remarkable instance of what
he here says: 'The best prophet naturally is the best guesser; and the
best guesser, he that is most versed and studied in the matters he
guesses at.' In this case, therefore, the best prophet is not the
physiologist, whose guess ends in materialism; nor the purely mental
philosopher, whose guess ends in spiritualism; but rather the man who,
being 'versed and studied' in all the facts appertaining to both sides
of the matter, ends in the only alternative guess which remains open.
And if that most troublesome individual, the 'plain man' of Locke,
should say it seems at least opposed to common sense to suppose that
there is anything in a burning candle or a rolling billiard-ball
substantially the same as mind, the answer is that if he could look into
my brain at this moment he would see nothing there but motion of
molecules, or motion of masses; and apart from the accident of my being
able to tell him so, his 'common sense' could never have divined that
these motions in my brain are concerned in the genesis of my spoken
thoughts.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is obvious that from this hypothesis as to the substantial identity
of mind and motion, two important questions arise; and I feel that some
reference to these questions is in present circumstances forced upon me,
because they have both been considered in precisely the same connexion
by one of the most powerful intellects that was ever sent out into the
world by this University. I mean the late Professor Clifford. As my
intimate and valued friend, I desire to mention his name in this place
with all the affection, as well as with all the admiration, to which I
well know it is so fully entitled; and if I appear to mention him only
in order to disagree with him, this is only because I know equally well
that in his large and magnanimous thought differences of philosophical
opinion were never felt to weaken the bonds of friendship.

In his well-known lecture on Body and Mind, Professor Clifford adopted
the hypothesis of identity which we are now considering, and from it was
led to the conclusion that if in the case of cerebral processes motion
is one with mind, the same must be true of motion wherever it occurs;
or, as he expressed it subsequently, the whole universe must be made of
mind-stuff. But in his view, although matter in motion presents what may
be termed the raw material of mind, it is only in the highly elaborated
constitution of the human brain that this raw material is sufficiently
wrought up to yield a self-conscious personality. Hence the dissolution
of a human brain implies the dissolution of a human mind; and hence also
the universe, although entirely composed of mind-stuff, is itself
mindless. Now, all I have to say about these two deductions is
this--they do not necessarily follow from the theory which is before us.
In holding that the mind of man perishes with his body, and that above
the mind of man there is no other, Clifford may have been right, or may
have been wrong. I am not here to discuss at length any questions of
such supreme importance. But I feel that I am here to insist upon the
one point which is immediately connected with my subject; and this is,
that whether or not Clifford was right in his conclusions, these
conclusions certainly did not follow by way of any logical sequence from
his premises. Because within the limits of human experience mind is only
known as associated with brain, it clearly does not follow that mind
cannot exist in any other mode. It does not even follow that any
probability upon this matter can be thus established. The basis of
analogy on which Clifford sought to rear an inference of cosmical
extent, was restricted to the one instance of mind as known upon one
planet; and, therefore, it is hard to imagine a more precarious use of
that precarious method which is called by logicians simple enumeration.
Indeed, even for what it is worth, the inference may be pointed with
quite as much effect in precisely the opposite direction. For we have
seen how little it is that we understand of the one mode in which we
certainly know that mind does exist; and if from this little we feel
impelled to conclude that there is a mode of mind which is not
restricted to brain, but co-extensive with motion, is consubstantial and
co-eternal with all that was, and is, and is to come; have we not at
least a suggestion, that high as the heavens are above the earth, so
high above our thoughts may be the thoughts of such a mind as this? I
offer no opinion upon the question whether the general order of Nature
does not require some one explanatory cause; nor upon the question
whether the mind of man itself does not point to something kindred in
the self-existing origin of things. I am not concerned to argue any
point upon which I feel that opinions may legitimately differ. I am only
concerned to show that, in so far as any deductions can be drawn from
the theory which is before us, they make at least as much against as in
favour of the cosmical conclusions arrived at by Clifford.

On February 17, in the year 1600, when the streets of Rome were thronged
with pilgrims from all the quarters of Christendom, while no less than
fifty cardinals were congregated for the Jubilee; into the densely
crowded Campo di Fiori a man was led to the stake, where, 'silent and
self-sustained,' before the eyes of all nations, he perished in the
flames. That death was the death of a martyr: it was met voluntarily in
attestation of truth. But most noble of all the noble army to which he
belonged, the name of that man is written large in history, as the name
of one who had fortitude to die, not in the cause of religious belief,
but in that of scientific conviction. For why did Bruno suffer? He
suffered, as we all know, because he refused to recant his persuasion of
the truth of the Copernican theory. Why, then, do I adduce the name of
Bruno at the close of this lecture? I do so because, as far as I have
been able to ascertain, he was the first clearly to enunciate the
monistic theory of things to which the consideration of my subject has
conducted us. This theory--or that as to the substantial identity of
mind and motion--was afterwards espoused, in different guises, by sundry
other writers; but to Bruno belongs the merit of its original
publication, and it was partly for his adherence to this publication
that he died. To this day Bruno is ordinarily termed a pantheist, and
his theory, which in the light of much fuller knowledge I am advocating,
Pantheism. I do not care to consider a difference of terms, where the
only distinction resides in so unintelligible an idea as that of the
creation of substance. It is more to the purpose to observe that in the
mind of its first originator--and this a mind which was sufficiently
clear in its thought to die for its perception of astronomical
truth--the theory of Pantheism was but a sublime extension of the then
contracted views of Theism. And I think that we of to-day, when we look
to the teaching of this martyr of science, will find that in his theory
alone do we meet with what I may term a philosophically adequate
conception of Deity. If the advance of natural science is now steadily
leading us to the conclusion that there is no motion without mind, must
we not see how the independent conclusion of mental science is thus
independently confirmed--the conclusion, I mean, that there is no being
without knowing? To me, at least, it does appear that the time has come
when we may begin, as it were in a dawning light, to see that the study
of Nature and the study of Mind are meeting upon this greatest of
possible truths. And if this is the case--if there is no motion without
mind, no being without knowing--shall we infer, with Clifford, that
universal being is mindless, or answer with a dogmatic negative that
most stupendous of questions--Is there knowledge with the Most High? If
there is no motion without mind, no being without knowing, may we not
rather infer, with Bruno, that it is in the medium of mind, and in the
medium of knowledge, we live, and move, and have our being?

This, I think, is the direction in which the inference points, if we are
careful to set the logical conditions with complete impartiality. But
the ulterior question remains, whether, so far as science is concerned,
it is here possible to point any inference at all: the whole orbit of
human knowledge may be too narrow to afford a parallax for measurements
so vast. Yet even here, if it be true that the voice of science must
thus of necessity speak the language of agnosticism, at least let us see
to it that the language is pure; let us not tolerate any barbarisms
introduced from the side of aggressive dogma. So shall we find that this
new grammar of thought does not admit of any constructions radically
opposed to more venerable ways of thinking; even if we do not find that
the often-quoted words of its earliest formulator apply with special
force to its latest dialects--that if a little knowledge of physiology
and a little knowledge of psychology dispose men to atheism, a deeper
knowledge of both, and, still more, a deeper thought upon their
relations to one another, will lead men back to some form of religion,
which, if it be more vague, may also be more worthy than that of earlier
days.

    'It is a beauteous evening, calm and free;
    The holy time is quiet as a nun,
    Breathless with adoration; the broad sun
    Is sinking down in its tranquillity;
    The gentleness of heaven is on the sea:
    Listen! the mighty being is awake,
    And doth with his eternal motion make
    A sound like thunder, everlastingly.'

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: _Leviathan_, pt. i. chaps, i. and vi.]

[Footnote 2: _Leviathan_, Introduction.]




MONISM


     'Das Ich ist nicht aus Leib und Seele zusammengesetzt, sondern es
     ist eine bestimmte Entwicklungsstufe des Wesens, das von
     verschiedenem Standpunkt betrachtet in körperliches und geistiges
     Dasein auseinanderfällt.'--Wundt, _Vorlesungen über die
     Menschen-und Thierseele_, i. 293.




INTRODUCTION.


In no respect has the progress of physical science exercised a more
profound influence upon philosophical thought than it has by proving an
apparently quantitative relation between material changes and mental
changes. It has always been known that there is qualitative relation.
Even long before mankind suspected that the brain was in any way
connected with thought, it was well understood that alcohol and other
poisons exercised their sundry influences on the mind in virtue of
influences which they exercised upon the body; and even the lowest
savages must always have been aware that a blow on the head is followed
by insensibility. But it was not until the rise of Physiology that this
qualitative relation between corporeal changes and mental changes was
gradually found to be a quantitative one--or that every particular
change of mind had an exact and invariable counterpart in some
particular change of body. It is needless for me to detail the
successive steps in the long course of physiological discovery whereby
this great fact has been established; it is enough to say that the fact
_is_ established to the satisfaction of every physiologist.

Now, when once the relation between material changes and mental changes
has been thus recognized as quantitative--or, which is the same thing,
when once the association has been recognized as both invariable and
exact--there arises the question as to how this relation is to be
explained. Formally considered--or considered as a matter of logical
statement irrespective of the relative probabilities which they may
present, either to the minds of different individuals or to the general
intelligence of the race--it appears to me that the possible hypotheses
are here seven in number.

     I. The mental changes may cause the material changes.

     II. The material changes may cause the mental changes.

     III. There may be no causation either way, because the association
     may be only a phenomenal association--the two apparently diverse
     classes of phenomena being really one and the same.

     IV. There may be no causation either way, because the association
     may be due to a harmony pre-established by a superior mind.

     V. There may be no causation either way, because the association
     may always be due to chance.

     VI. There may be no causation either way, because the material
     order may not have any real existence at all, being merely an ideal
     creation of the mental order.

     VII. Whether or not there be any causation either way, the
     association may be one which it is necessarily beyond the power of
     the human mind to explain.

So far as I can see, this list of possible answers to the question
before us is exhaustive. I will next show why, in my opinion, the last
four of them may be excluded _in limine_.

The suggestion of pre-established harmony (IV) merely postpones the
question: it _assumes_ a higher _mind_ as adjusting correspondencies
between known minds and animal bodies with respect to the activities of
each; and, therefore, it either leaves untouched the ultimate question
concerning the relation of mind (as such) to matter, or else it answers
this question in terms of spiritualism (I).

The suggestion of chance (V) is effectually excluded by the doctrine of
chances: even in any one individual mind, the association between mental
changes and material changes is much too intimate, constant, and
detailed to admit of any one reasonably supposing that it can be due
only to chance.

The suggestion of pure idealism (VI) ultimately implies that the
thinking Ego is itself the sole existence--a position which cannot,
indeed, be turned by any assault of logic; but one which is
nevertheless too obviously opposed to common sense to admit of any
serious defence; its immunity from direct attack arises only from the
gratuitous nature of its challenge to prove a negative (namely, that the
thinking Ego is _not_ the sole existence), and this a negative which is
necessarily beyond the region of proof.

Lastly, the suggestion that the problem is necessarily insoluble (VII)
does not deserve to be regarded as an hypothesis at all; for to suppose
that the problem is necessarily insoluble is merely to exclude the
supposition of there being any hypothesis available.

In view of these several considerations, it appears to me that, although
in a formal sense we may say there are altogether seven possible answers
to the question before us, in reality, or for the purposes of practical
discussion, there are nowadays but three--namely those which head the
above list, and which I will now proceed to consider.

I have named these three hypotheses in the order of their appearance
during the history of philosophical thought. The earliest is the
spiritualistic. As far back as we can trace the conceptions of primitive
man, we meet with an unquestioning belief that it is his spirit which
_animates_ his body; and, starting from this belief as explanatory of
the movements of his own body, he readily attributes movements elsewhere
to analogous agencies--the theory of _animism_ in Nature thus becoming
the universal theory in all early stages of culture. It also appears to
be the theory most natural to our own children during the early years of
their dawning intelligence, and would doubtless continue through life in
the case of every individual human being, were he not subsequently
instructed in the reasons which have led to its rejection by many other
members of his race. These reasons, as already observed, have been
furnished in their entirety only within comparatively recent times; not
until Physiology was able to prove how intimate is the association
between cerebral processes and mental processes did it become possible
for materialism to turn the tables upon spiritualism, by simply
inverting the hypothesis. Lastly, although the theory of Monism (III)
may be traced back at least as far as the pantheistic thought of
Buddhism, it there had reference to theology as distinguished from
psychology. And even as presented in the writings of Bruno, Spinoza, and
other so-called monists prior to the present century, the hypothesis
necessarily lacked completeness on account of the absence of knowledge
afterwards supplied by physiology. For Monism, in the sense of this term
as I shall use it, may be metaphorically regarded as the child of the
two pre-existing theories, Spiritualism and Materialism. The birth of
this child was necessarily impossible before both its parents had
reached mature age. On the one hand it was necessary that the theory of
Spiritualism should have outgrown its infancy as Animism, its childhood
as Polytheism, before it entered upon its youth as Monotheism--or before
it was able to supply material for the conception of Monism as a theory
of cosmical extent. On the other hand, Materialism required to grow into
the fullness of manhood, under the nursing influence of Science, before
it was possible to engender this new-born offspring; for this offspring
is new-born. The theory of Monism, as we are about to consider it, is a
creature of our own generation; and it is only as such that I desire to
call attention to the child. In order, however, to do this, I must
follow the example of biographers in general, and begin by giving a
brief sketch of both the parents.




CHAPTER I.

SPIRITUALISM.


In proceeding to consider the opposite theories of Spiritualism and
Materialism, it is before all else desirable to be perfectly clear upon
the point of theory whereby they are essentially distinguished. This
point is that which is raised by the question whether mind is the cause
or the effect of motion. Both theories are dualistic, and therefore
agree in holding that there is causation as between mind and motion:
they differ only in their teaching as to the direction in which the
causation proceeds. Of course, out of this fundamental difference there
arise many secondary differences. The most important of these secondary
differences has reference to the nature of the eternal or self-existing
substance. Both theories agree that there is such a substance; but on
the question whether this substance be mental or material, the two
theories give contradictory answers, and logically so. For, if mind as
we directly know it (namely, in ourselves) is taken to be a cause of
motion, within our experience mind is accredited with priority; and
hence the inference that elsewhere, or universally, mind is prior to
motion. Furthermore, as motion cannot take place without something which
moves, this something is likewise supposed to have been the result of
mind: hence the doctrine of the creation by mind both of matter and of
energy. On the other hand, the theory of materialism, by refusing to
assign priority to mind as known directly in ourselves, naturally
concludes that mind is elsewhere, or universally, the result of matter
in motion--in other words, that matter in motion is the eternal or
self-existing substance, and, as such, the cause of mind wherever mind
occurs.

I may observe, in passing, that although this cosmical deduction from
the theory of materialism is, as I have said, natural, it is not (as is
the case with the corresponding deduction from the theory of
spiritualism) inevitable. For it is logically possible that even though
all known minds be the results of matter in motion, matter in motion may
nevertheless itself be the result of an unknown mind. This, indeed, is
the position virtually adopted by Locke in his celebrated controversy
with the Bishop of Worcester. Having been taken to task by this divine
for the materialistic tendency of his writings, Locke defends himself by
denying the necessary character of the deduction which we are now
considering. For example, he insists, 'I see no contradiction in it that
the first eternal thinking being should, if he pleased, give to certain
systems of created senseless matter, put together as he thinks fit, some
degrees of sense, perception, and thought: though, as I think, I have
proved (lib. IV, ch. 10 and 14 &c.), it is no less than a contradiction
to suppose matter (which is evidently in its own nature void of sense
and thought) should be that eternal first thinking being.' Under this
view, it will be observed, mind is supposed to have the ultimate
priority, and thus to have been the original or creating cause of matter
in motion, which, in turn, becomes the cause (or, at least, the
conditional condition) of mind of a lower order. This view, however,
need not detain us, inasmuch as it can only be held by those who, on
grounds independent of philosophical thinking, already believe in mind
as the First Cause or Eternal Being: this belief granted, there is, of
course, an end of any question as between Spiritualism and Materialism.
I have, therefore, only mentioned this possible phase of spiritualistic
theory, in order to show that the theory of Materialism as applied to a
human being does not _necessarily_ involve an extension of that theory
to the cosmos. But I hold this distinction as of no practical value: it
merely indicates a logical possibility which no one would be likely to
entertain except on grounds independent of those upon which the
philosophical dispute between Spiritualism and Materialism must be
confined.

Of more practical importance is the remark already made, namely, that
the fundamental or diagnostic distinction between these two species of
theory consists _only_ in the views which they severally take on the
question of causality. This remark is of practical importance, because
in the debate between spiritualists and materialists it is often lost
sight of: nay, in some cases, it is even expressly ignored. Obviously,
when it is either intentionally or unintentionally disregarded, the
debate ceases to be directed to the question under discussion, and may
then wander aimlessly over the whole field of collateral speculation.
Throughout the present essay, therefore, the discussion will be
restricted to the only topic which we have to discuss--namely, whether
mind is the cause of motion, motion the cause of mind, or neither the
cause of the other.

The view to be first considered--namely, that mind is the cause of
motion--obviously has one great advantage over the opposite view: it
supposes the causality to proceed from that which is the source of our
idea of causality (the mind); not from that into which this idea has
been read by the mind. Hence, it is so far less difficult to imagine
that mental changes are the cause of bodily changes than _vice versa_;
for upon this hypothesis we are starting at least from the substance of
immediate knowledge, and not from the reflection of that knowledge in
what we call the external world.

On the other hand, the theory of Spiritualism labours under certain
speculative difficulties which appear to me overwhelming. The most
formidable of these difficulties arises from the inevitable collision of
the theory with the scientific doctrine of the conservation of energy.
Whether or not we adopt the view that all causation of a physical kind
is ultimately an expression of the fact that matter and energy are
indestructible[3], it is equally certain that this indestructibility is
a necessary condition to the occurrence of causation as natural.
Therefore, if the mind of man is capable of breaking in as an
independent cause upon the otherwise uniform system of natural
causation, the only way in which it could do so would be by either
destroying or creating certain _quanta_ of either matter or energy or
both. But to suppose the mind capable of doing any of these things would
be to suppose that the mind is a cause in some other sense than a
physical or a natural cause; it would be to suppose that the mind is a
super-natural cause, or, more plainly, that all mental activity, so far
as it is an efficient cause of bodily movement, is of the nature of a
miracle.

This conclusion, which appears to me unavoidably implicated in the
spiritualistic hypothesis, is not merely improbable _per se_, but admits
of being shown virtually impossible if we proceed to consider the
consequences to which it necessarily leads. A sportsman, for example,
pulls the trigger of a gun, thereby initiating a long train of physical
causes, which we may take up at the point where the powder is
discharged, the shot propelled, and the bird dropped. Here the man's
volition is supposed to have broken in upon the otherwise continuous
stream of physical causes--first by modifying the molecular movements of
his brain, so as to produce the particular co-ordination of
neuro-muscular movement required to take accurate aim and to fire at the
right moment; next by converting a quantity of gunpowder into gas,
propelling a quantity of lead through the air; and finally, by killing a
bird. Now, without tracing the matter further than this, let us consider
how enormous a change the will of the man has introduced, even by so
trivial an exercise of its activity. No doubt the first change in the
material world was exceedingly slight: the molecular movement in the
cortex of his brain was probably not more than might be dynamically
represented by some small fraction of a foot-pound. But so intricate is
the _nexus_ of physical causality throughout the whole domain of Nature,
that the intervention of even so minute a disturbance _ab extra_ is
obviously bound to continue to assert an influence of ever-widening
extent as well as of everlasting duration. The heat generated by the
explosion of the powder, the changed disposition of the shot, the death
of the bird--leading to innumerable physical changes as to stoppage of
many mechanical processes previously going on in the bird's body, loss
of animal heat, &c., and also to innumerable vital changes, leading to
a stoppage of all the mechanical changes which the bird would have
helped to condition had it lived to die some other death, to propagate
its kind, and thus indirectly condition an incalculable number of future
changes that would have been brought about by the ever increasing number
of its descendants--these and an indefinite number of other physical
changes must all be held to have followed as a direct consequence of the
man's volition thus suddenly breaking in as an independent cause upon
the otherwise uniform course of Nature. Now, I say that, apart from some
system of pre-established harmony, it appears simply inconceivable that
the order of Nature could be maintained at all, if it were thus liable
to be interfered with at any moment in any number of points. And if the
spiritualist takes refuge in the further hypothesis of a pre-established
harmony between acts of human (not to add brute) volition and causes of
a natural kind, we have only to observe that he thus lands himself in a
speculative position which is practically identical with that occupied
by the materialist. For the only difference between the two positions
then is that the necessity which the materialist takes to be imposed on
human volition by the system of natural causation, is now taken by the
spiritualist to be equally imposed by a super-natural volition. The
necessity which binds the human volition must be equally rigid in
either case; and therefore it can make no practical difference whether
the source of it be regarded as natural or super-natural, material or
mental: so that a man be fated to will only in certain ways--and this
with all the rigour which belongs to causation as physical--it is
scarcely worth while to dispute whether the predestination is of God or
of Nature. There can be no question, however, that in this matter the
possibility which I have supposed to be suggested by the spiritualist is
more far-fetched than that which obviously lies to the hand of the
materialist; and, moreover, that it too plainly wears the appearance of
a desperate device to save a hollow theory.

It remains to add that this great difficulty against the spiritualistic
theory has been revealed in all its force only during the present
generation. Since the days of fetishism, indeed, the difficulty has
always been an increasing one--growing with the growth of the perception
of uniformity on the one hand, and of mechanical as distinguished from
volitional agency on the other. But it was not until the correlation of
all the physical forces had been proved by actual experiment, and the
scientific doctrine of the conservation of energy became as a
consequence firmly established, that the difficulty in question assumed
the importance of a logical barrier to the theory of mental changes
acting as efficient causes of material changes.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 3: In the opinion of some modern writers the indestructibility
of matter and the conservation of energy are alone sufficient to explain
all the facts of natural causation. 'For,' it is urged, 'if in any case
similar antecedents did not determine similar consequents, on one or
other of these occasions some _quantum_ of force, or of matter, or of
both, must have disappeared--or, which is the same thing, the law of
causation cannot have been constant.' In a future chapter I shall have
to recur to this view. Meanwhile I have only to observe that whether or
not the law of causation is nothing more than a re-statement of the fact
that matter and energy are indestructible, it is equally true that this
fact is at least a necessary _condition_ to the operation of that law.]




CHAPTER II.

MATERIALISM.


This is the theory which presents great fascination to the student of
physical science. By laborious investigation physiology has established
the fact beyond the reach of rational dispute, that there is a constant
relation of concomitancy between cerebral action and thought. Within
experience mind is found in constant and definite association with that
highly complex and peculiar disposition of matter called a living brain.
The size and elaboration of this peculiar structure throughout the
animal kingdom stand in conspicuous proportion to the degree of
intelligence displayed; while the impairment of this structure, whether
by congenital defect, mutilation, anaemia, decay, or appropriate poison,
entails corresponding impairment of mental processes. Thus much being
established, no reasonable man can hesitate in believing the relation
between neurosis and psychosis to be a constant and concomitant
relation, so that the step between this, and regarding it as a causal
relation, seems indeed a small one. For, in all matters of physical
inquiry, whenever we have proved a constant relation of concomitancy in
a sequence _A B_, we call _A_ the cause of _B_; and, therefore, it has
been frequently said that the evidence of causation between neurosis and
psychosis is recognized causation. Lastly, to fortify this hypothesis,
materialists point to the doctrine of the conservation of energy, which
is supplied by the science of physics as a sort of buttress in this
matter to the teachings of physiology. For, as this doctrine compels us
to believe that the chain of physical causation involved in cerebral
processes can nowhere be broken or deflected _ab extra_, we are
compelled to believe that the mental processes, which are correlatively
associated with these cerebral processes, can nowhere escape from 'the
charmed circle of the forces,' so that whether we look to the detailed
teachings of physiology, or to the more general teachings of physics, we
alike perceive that natural science appears to leave no locus for mind
other than as a something which is in some way a result of motion.

The position of Materialism being thus at first sight so naturally
strong, and having been in recent years so fortified by the labours of
physiology, it is not surprising that in the present generation
Materialism should be in the ascendant. It is the simple truth, as a
learned and temperate author, speaking from the side of theology, has
recently said, that

     'Materialism is a danger to which individuals and societies will
     always be more or less exposed. The present generation, however,
     and especially the generation which is growing up, will obviously
     be very especially exposed to it; as much so, perhaps, as any
     generation in the history of the world. Within the last thirty
     years the great wave of spiritualistic or idealistic thought ...
     has been receding and decreasing; and another, which is in the main
     driven by materialistic forces, has been gradually rising behind,
     vast and threatening. It is but its crest that we at present see;
     it is but a certain vague shaking produced by it that we at present
     feel; but we shall probably soon enough fail not both to see and
     feel it fully and distinctly[4].'

Such being the present importance of Materialism, I shall devote the
present chapter to a consideration of this theory. Each of the points in
the argument for Materialism which I have mentioned above admits, of
course, of elaboration; but I think that their enumeration contains all
that is essential to the theory in question. It now devolves upon us to
inquire whether this theory is adequate to meet the facts.

And here I may as well at once give it as my own opinion that, of
however much service the theory of Materialism may be, up to a certain
point, it can never be accepted by any competent mind as a final
explanation of the facts with which it has to deal. Unquestionable as
its use may be as a fundamental hypothesis in physiology and medicine,
it is wholly inadequate as a hypothesis in philosophy. That is to say,
so long as there is a constant relation of concomitancy found by
experience to obtain between neural processes and mental processes, so
long no harm can accrue to physical science by assuming, for its own
purposes, that this relation is a causal one. But as soon as the
question concerning the validity of this assumption is raised into the
region of philosophy, it receives the answer that the assumption cannot
be allowed to pass. For where the question becomes one not as to the
_fact_ of the association but as to its _nature_, philosophy, which must
have regard to the facts of mind no less than to those of matter, must
pronounce that the hypothesis is untenable; for the hypothesis of this
association being one of causality acting from neurosis to psychosis,
cannot be accepted without doing violence, not merely to our faculty of
reason, but to our very idea of causation itself.

A very small amount of thinking is enough to show that what I call my
knowledge of the external world, is merely a knowledge of my own mental
modifications. A step further and I find that my idea of causation as a
principle in the external world is derived from my knowledge of this
principle in the internal world. For I find that my idea of force and
energy in the external world is a mere projection of the idea which I
have of effort within the region of my own consciousness; and therefore
my only idea of causation is that which is originally derived from the
experience which I have of this principle as obtaining among my own
mental modifications.

If once we see plainly that the idea of causation is derived from
within, and that what we call the evidence of physical causation is
really the evidence of mental modifications following one another in a
definite sequence, we shall then clearly see, not merely that we have no
evidence, but that we _can have_ no evidence of causation as proceeding
from object to subject. However cogent the evidence may appear at first
sight to be, it is found to vanish like a cloud as soon as it is exposed
to the light of adequate contemplation. In the very act of thinking the
evidence, we are virtually denying its possibility as evidence; for as
evidence it appeals only to the mind, and since the mind can only know
its own sequences, the evidence must be presenting to the mind an
account of its own modifications; from the mere fact, therefore, of its
being accepted as thinkable, the evidence is proved to be illusory.

To uneducated men it appears an indisputable fact of 'common sense' that
the colour of a flower exists as perceived in the flower, apart from any
relation to the percipient mind. A physiologist has gone further into
the thicket of things, and finds that the way is not so simple as this.
He regards the quality of colour as necessarily related to the faculty
of visual perception; does not suppose that the colour exists _as such_
in the flower, but thinks of the something there as a certain order of
vibrations which, when brought into relation with consciousness through
the medium of certain nerves, gives rise to the perception experienced;
and in order to account for the translation into visual feeling of an
event so unlike that feeling as is the process taking place in the
flower, physiologists have recourse to an elaborate theory, such as that
of Helmholtz or Hering. In other words, physiologists here fully
recognize that colour, or any other thing perceived, only exists _as
perceived_ in virtue of a subjective element blending with an objective;
the thing _as perceived_ is recognized as having no existence apart from
its relation to a percipient mind. Now, although physiologists are at
one with the philosophers thus far, it is to be feared that very
frequently they are in the same position as the above-mentioned
'uneducated men,' when it becomes needful to press still further into
the thicket. For after having distinguished the necessity of recognizing
a mind-element in any possible theory of perception, they forthwith
proceed to disregard this element when passing from the ground of
perception to that of thought. Although the ideas of matter, motion,
causation, and so on, are themselves as much the offspring of a thinking
mind, with its environment, as the perception of colour is a conceiving
of the percipient mind, with _its_ environment, these ideas are
inconsistently supposed to stand for equivalent realities of the
external world--to truly represent things that are virtually independent
of any necessary relation to mind. Or, as the case has recently been
well put by Principal Caird:

     'You cannot get mind as an ultimate product of matter, for in the
     very attempt to do so you have already begun with mind. The
     easiest step of any such inquiry involves categories of thought,
     and it is in terms of thought that the very problem you are
     investigating can be so much as stated. You cannot start in your
     investigations with a bare, self-identical, objective fact,
     stripped of every ideal element or contribution from thought. The
     least and lowest part of outward observation is not an independent
     entity--fact _minus_ mind, and out of which mind may, somewhere or
     other, be seen to emerge; but it is fact or object as it appears to
     an observing mind, in the medium of thought, having mind or thought
     as an inseparable factor of it. Whether there be such a thing as an
     absolute world outside of thought, whether there be such things as
     matter and material atoms existing in themselves before any mind
     begins to perceive or think about them, is not the question before
     us. If it were possible to conceive of such atoms, at any rate you,
     before you begin to make anything of them, must think them; and you
     can never, by thinking about atoms, prove that there is no such
     thing as thought other than as an ultimate product of atoms. Before
     you could reach thought or mind as a last result you must needs
     eliminate from it the data of the problem with which you start, and
     that you can never do, any more than you can stand on your own
     shoulders or outstrip your own shadow.... In one word, to
     constitute the reality of the outward world--to make possible the
     minimum of knowledge, nay, the very existence for us of molecules
     and atoms--you must needs presuppose that thought or thinking self,
     which some would persuade us is to be educed or evolved from
     them.... To make thought a function of matter is thus, simply, to
     make thought a function of itself[5].'

From this reasoning there can be no escape; and it is more rational for
a man to believe that colour exists as such in a flower than, after
having plainly seen that such cannot be the case, forthwith to
disregard the teaching of this analogy, and to imagine that any apparent
evidence of mind as a result of matter or motion can possibly be
entertained as real evidence.

Remembering, then, that from the nature of this particular case it is as
impossible for mind to prove its own causation as it is for water to
rise above its source, it may still be well, for the sake of further
argument, to sink this general consideration, and to regard such
spurious evidence of causation as is presented by Materialism, without
prejudice arising from its being _primâ facie_ inadmissible.

Materialists, as already observed, are fond of saying that the evidence
of causation from neurosis to psychosis is as good as such evidence can
be proved to be in any other case. Now, quite apart from the general
considerations just adduced to show that from the peculiar nature of
this case there can here be no such evidence at all--quite apart from
this, and treating the problem on the lower ground of the supposed
analogy, it may be clearly shown that the statement is untrue. For a
little thought will show that in point of fact the only resemblance
between this supposed case of causation and all other cases of
recognized causation, consists in the invariability of the correlation
between cerebral processes and mental processes; in all other points the
analogy fails. For in all cases of recognized causation there is a
perceived _connexion_ between the cause and the effect; the antecedents
are physical, and the consequents are physical. But in the case before
us there is no perceived, or even conceivable, connexion between the
cause and the effect; for the causes are supposed to be physical and the
effects mental. And the antithesis thus posited is alone sufficient to
separate _toto coelo_ the case of causation supposed from that of all
cases of causation recognized. From the singularly clear and
well-balanced statement of this subject given by Professor Allman in his
Presidential Address before the British Association, I may here fitly
quote the following:--

     'If we could see any analogy between thought and any one of the
     admitted phenomena of matter, we should be justified in the first
     of these conclusions (i. e. that of Materialism) as the simplest,
     and as affording a hypothesis most in accordance with the
     comprehensiveness of natural laws; but between thought and the
     physical phenomena of matter there is not only no analogy, but no
     conceivable analogy; and the obvious and continuous path which we
     have hitherto followed up in our reasonings from the phenomena of
     lifeless matter through those of living matter here comes suddenly
     to an end. The chasm between unconscious life and thought is deep
     and impassable, and no transitional phenomena can be found by
     which, as by a bridge, we may span it over[6].'

And, not unduly to multiply quotations, I shall only adduce one more
from another of the few eminent men of science who have seen their way
clearly in this matter, and have expressed what they have seen in
language as clear as their vision. Professor Tyndall writes:--

     'The passage from the physics of the brain to the corresponding
     facts of consciousness is unthinkable. Granted that a definite
     thought and a definite molecular action in the brain occur
     simultaneously, we do not possess the intellectual organ, nor
     apparently any rudiment of the organ, which would enable us to
     pass, by a process of reasoning, from the one phenomenon to the
     other. They appear together but we do not know why. Were our minds
     and senses so expanded, strengthened, and illuminated, as to enable
     us to see and feel the very molecules of the brain; were we capable
     of following all their motions, all their groupings, all their
     electrical discharges, if such there be; and were we intimately
     acquainted with the corresponding states of thought and feeling, we
     should be as far as ever from the solution of the problem. How are
     these physical processes connected with the facts of consciousness?
     The chasm between the two classes of phenomena would still remain
     intellectually impassable[7].'

Next, in all cases of recognized causation there is a perceived
_equivalency_ between cause and effect, such equivalency belonging to
the very essence of that in which we conceive causation to consist. But
as between matter and motion on the one side, and feeling and thought on
the other, there can be no such equivalency conceivable. That no such
equivalency is conceivable may be rendered apparent on grounds of
Materialism itself. For Materialism is bound to accept the fundamental
doctrine of modern physics--that, viz. as to the conservation of
energy--and therefore it becomes evident that unless we assimilate
thought with energy, there is no possibility of a causal relation, or a
relation of equivalency, as obtaining between the one and the other.
For however little we may know about brain-dynamics, materialists, at
least, must take it for granted that in every process of cerebration the
matter and force concerned are indestructible quantities, and therefore
that all their possible equations are fully satisfied, could we but
follow them out. Howsoever complex we may suppose the flux and reflux of
forces to be within the structure of a living brain, it is no more
possible for any one of the forces concerned to escape from brain to
mind, than it would be for such an escape to occur in a steam-engine or
a watch; the doctrine of the conservation of energy forms an insuperable
bar to the supposition that any equation in the region of physics can be
left unsatisfied, in order to pass over and satisfy some other equation
in the region of psychics.

Of course in saying this I am aware that some of the more clear-sighted
of the materialists have plainly perceived this difficulty in all its
magnitude, and so have felt that unless it can be met, any theory of
Materialism must necessarily contain a radical contradiction of
principles. Some few materialists have therefore sought to meet the
difficulty in the only way it can be met, viz. by boldly asserting the
possibility of thought and energy being transmutable. On this view
thought becomes a mode of motion, and takes its rank among the forces as
identical in nature with heat, light, electricity, and the rest. But
this view is also inherently impossible. For suppose, as a matter of
argument, that physiologists should discover a mechanical equivalent of
thought, so that we might estimate the value of a calculation in thermal
units, or the 'labour of love' in foot-pounds: still we should not be
out of our difficulties; we should only have to cut a twist of flax to
find a lock of iron. For by thus assimilating thought with energy, we
should in no wise have explained the fundamental antithesis between
subject and object. The fact would remain, if possible, more
unaccountable than ever, that mind should present absolutely no point of
real analogy with motion. Involved with the essential idea of motion is
the idea of extension; suppress the latter and the former must
necessarily vanish, for motion only means transition in space of
something itself extended. But thought, as far as we can possibly know
it, is known and distinguished by the very peculiarity of not having
extension. Therefore, even if we were to find a mechanical equivalent of
thought, thought would still not be proved a mode of motion. On the
contrary, what would be proved would be that, in becoming transformed
into thought, energy had ceased to be energy; in passing out of its
relation to space it would cease to exist as energy, and if it again
passed into that relation it would only be by starting _de novo_ on a
new course of history. Therefore the proof that thought has a mechanical
equivalent would simply amount to the proof, not that thought _is_
energy, but that thought _destroys_ energy. And if Materialism were to
prove this, Materialism would commit suicide. For if once it were
proved that the relation of energy to thought is such that thought is
able to absorb or temporarily to annihilate energy, the whole argument
of Materialism would be inverted, and whatever evidence there is of
causation as between mind and matter would become available in all its
force on the side of Spiritualism. This seems plain, for if it even were
conceivable--which most distinctly it is not--that a motor could ever
become a motive, and so pass from the sphere of dynamics into the sphere
of consciousness, the fact would go to prove, not that the motor was the
cause of the motive, but rather that the motive was the cause of
destroying the motor; so that at that point the otherwise unbroken chain
of physical sequences was interrupted by the motive striking in upon it,
and in virtue of the mysterious power supposed to have been proved by
physiology, cancelling the motor, so allowing the nerve-centre to act as
determined by the motive.

Of course I wish it to be understood that I believe we are here dealing
with what I may call, in perhaps suitably contradictory terms,
inconceivable conceptions. But let it be remembered that I am not
responsible for this ambiguity; I am only showing what must be the
necessary outcome of analysis if we begin by endeavouring phenomenally
to unite the most antithetical of elements--mind and motion.
Materialism, at least, will not be the gainer should it ever be proved
that in the complex operations of the brain a unique exception occurs
to the otherwise universal law of the conservation of energy in space.

We may, therefore, quit the suggestion that the difficulty experienced
by Materialism of showing an equivalency between neurosis and psychosis
can ever be met by assuming that some day mental processes may admit of
being expressed in terms of physical. But before leaving this difficulty
with regard to equivalency, I may mention one other point that seems to
me of importance in connexion with it. I have already said that if we
suppose causation to proceed from brain to mind, we must suppose this
essential requirement of equivalency between the cerebral causes and the
mental effects to be satisfied somewhere.

But where are we to say that it is satisfied? Even if we suppose that
thought has a mechanical equivalent, and that causation proceeds in the
direction from energy to thought, still, when we have regard to the
supposed effects, we find that even yet they bear no kind of equivalency
to their supposed causes. The brain of a Shakespeare probably did not,
as a system, exhibit so much energy as does the brain of an elephant;
and the cerebral operations of a Darwin may not have had a very
perceptibly larger mechanical equivalent than those of a banker's clerk.
Yet in the world of thought the difference between our estimate of the
results, or 'work done,' in these cases is such as to drive all ideas of
equivalency to the winds. Doubtless, a materialist will answer that it
is not fair to take our estimate of 'work done' in the world of mind as
the real equivalent of the energy supposed to have passed over from the
world of motion, seeing that our estimate is based, not on the
quantitative amount of thought produced, but rather on its qualitative
character with reference to the social requirements of the race. But to
this it is enough to answer that we have no means of gauging the
quantity of thought produced other than by having regard to _its_
effects in the world of mind, and this we cannot do except by having
regard to its qualitative character. Many a man, for instance, must have
consumed more than a thousand times the brain-substance and brain-energy
that Shelley expended over his 'Ode to a Skylark,' and yet as a result
have produced an utterly worthless poem. Now, in what way are we to
estimate the 'work done' in two such cases, except by looking to the
relative effects produced in the only region where they are produced,
viz. in the region of mind? Yet, when we do so estimate them, what
becomes of the evidence of equivalency between the physical causes and
the psychical effects?

Now if thus, whether or not we try to form an estimate, it is impossible
to show any semblance of equivalency between the supposed causes and the
alleged effects, how can any one be found to say that the evidence of
causation is here as valid as it is in any other case? The truth rather
is that the alleged effects stand out of every relation to the supposed
causes, with the exception only of being associated in time.

There still remains one other enormous difficulty in the way of the
theory of Materialism; it necessarily embodies the theory of _conscious
automatism_, and is therefore called upon to explain why consciousness
and thought have ever appeared upon the scene of things at all. That
this is the necessary position of Materialism is easily proved as
follows. We have already seen that Materialism would commit suicide by
supposing that energy could be transmuted into thought, for this would
amount to nothing short of supposing the destruction of energy as such;
and to suppose energy thus destructible would be to open wide the door
of spiritualism. Materialism, therefore, is logically bound to argue in
this way: We cannot conceive of a conscious idea, or mental change, as
in any way affecting the course of a cerebral reflex, or material
change; while, on the other hand, our knowledge of the conservation of
energy teaches us as an axiom that the cerebral changes must determine
each other in their sequence as in a continuous series. Nowhere can we
suppose the physical process to be interrupted or diverted by the
psychical process; and therefore we must conclude that thought and
volition really play no part whatever in determining action. Thoughts
and feelings are but indices which show in the mirror of the mind
certain changes that are proceeding in the matter of the brain, and are
as inefficient in influencing those changes as the shadow of a cloud is
powerless to direct the movements of that of which it is the shadow.

But when Materialism reaches, in a clear and articulate manner, this
inference as a conclusion necessary from its premises, it becomes
opposed at once to common sense and to the requirements of methodical
reason. It becomes opposed to common sense because we all feel it is
practically impossible to believe that the world would now have been
exactly what it is even if consciousness, thought, and volition had
never appeared upon the scene--that railway trains would have been
running filled with mindless passengers, or that telephones would have
been invented by brains that could not think to speak to ears that could
not hear. And the conclusion is opposed to the requirements of
methodical reason, because reason to be methodical is bound to have an
answer to the question that immediately arises from the conclusion. This
question simply is, Why have consciousness, thought, and volition ever
been called into existence; and why are they related, as they are
related, to cerebral action? Materialism, by here undertaking to prove
that these things stand uselessly isolated from all other things, is
bound to show some reason why they ever came to be, and to be what they
are. For observe, it is not merely that these things exist in a supposed
unnecessary relation to all other things; the fact to be explained is
that they exist in a most intimately woven and invariable connexion with
certain highly complex forms of organic structure and certain highly
peculiar distributions of physical force. Yet these unique and
extraordinary things are supposed by automatism to be always results and
never causes; in the theatre of things they are supposed to be always
spectators and never actors; in the laboratory of life they are supposed
to be always by-products; and therefore in the order of nature they are
supposed to have no _raison d'être_. Such a state of matters would be
accountable enough if the stream of mental changes were but partly,
occasionally, and imperfectly associated with the stream of material
changes; but as the association is so minute, invariable, and precise,
the hypothesis of the association being merely accidental, or _not
requiring explanation_, becomes, at the bar of methodical reasoning,
self-convicted of absurdity.

The state of the case, then, simply is that two distinct facts stand to
be explained by the theory of conscious automatism--first, why psychosis
should ever have been developed as a mysterious appendage to neurosis;
and, secondly, why the association between these things should be so
intimate and precise. Assuredly, on the principles of evolution, which
materialists at least cannot afford to disregard, it would be a wholly
anomalous fact that so wide and general a class of phenomena as those of
mind should have become developed in constantly ascending degrees
throughout the animal kingdom, if they are entirely without use to
animals. If psychosis is, as supposed, a function of neurosis, the
doctrine of natural selection alone would forbid us to imagine that this
function differs from all other functions in being itself functionless.
If it would be detrimental to the theory of natural selection that any
one isolated structure--such as the tail of a rattlesnake--should be
adapted to perform a function useless to the animal possessing it, how
utterly destructive of that theory would be the fact that all the
phenomena of mind have been elaborated as functions of nerve-tissue
without any one of them ever having been of any use either to the
individual or to the species. And the difficulty that thus arises is
magnified without limit when we remember that the phenomena of mind are
invariable in their association with cerebral structure, grade for
grade, and process for process.

It is of no argumentative use to point to the fact that many adaptive
movements in animals are performed by nerve-centres apart from any
association with consciousness or volition, because all the facts on
this head go to prove that consciousness and volition come in most
suggestively just where adaptive movements begin to grow varied and
complex, and then continue to develop with a proportional reference to
the growing variety and complexity of these movements. The facts,
therefore, irresistibly lead to the conclusion (if we argue here as we
should in the case of any other function) that consciousness and
volition are functions of nerve-tissue super-added to its previous
functions, in order to meet new and more complex demands on its powers
of adaptation.

Neither is it of any argumentative use to point to the fact that
adaptive actions which originally are performed with conscious volition
may by practice come to be performed without conscious volition. For it
is certain that no adaptive action of quite a novel kind is ever
performed from the first without consciousness of its performance, and
therefore, although it is true that by repetition its performance may
become mechanical or unconscious, this does not prove that consciousness
was without use in producing the adaptive action. It only proves that
after a nervous mechanism has been elaborated by the help of
consciousness, consciousness may be withdrawn and leave the finished
mechanism to work alone; the structure having been completed, the
scaffolding necessary to its completion may be removed.

But passing over this difficulty which the theory of conscious
automatism seems bound to encounter in its collision with the theory of
natural selection, the most insuperable of all its difficulties arises
from the bare fact, which it cannot explain, that conscious intelligence
exists, and exists in the most intimate relation with one peculiar kind
of material structure. For automatists must concede that the evidence
of causation in the region of mind is at least as cogent as it is in the
region of matter, seeing that the whole science of psychology is only
rendered possible as a science by the fundamental fact of observation
that mental antecedents determine mental consequents. Therefore, if we
call a physical sequence _A, B, C_, and a mental sequence _a, b, c_
automatists have to explain, not merely why there should be such a thing
as a mental sequence at all, but also why the sequence _a, b, c_ should
always proceed, link for link, with the sequence _A, B, C_. It clearly
is no answer to say that the sequence _A, B, C_ implies the successive
activity of certain definite nerve-centres _A', B', C'_ which have for
their subjective effects the sequence _a, b, c_ so that whenever the
sequence _A, B, C_ occurs the sequence _a, b, c_ must likewise occur.
This is no answer, because it merely restates the hypothesis of
automatism, and begs the whole question to be discussed. What methodical
reason demands as an answer is simply why the sequence _A, B, C_ even
though we freely grant it due to the successive activity of certain
definite nerve-centres, should be attended by the sequence _a, b, c_.
Reason perceives clearly enough that the sequence _a, b, c_ belongs to a
wholly different category from the sequence _A, B, C_ the one being
immediately known as a process taking place in a something which is
without extension or physical properties of any kind, and the other
taking place in a something which when, translated by the previous
something, we recognize as having extension and the other antithetical
properties which we class together as physical. There would of course be
no difficulty if the sequence _A, B, C_ continued through any amount of
complexity in the same conceivable category of being; so that there
would be nothing actually inconceivable in cerebral sequence--changes
running through _D, E, F_, &c., to an extent sufficient to cause
unconscious automatism of any degree of complexity. But that which does
require explanation from automatists is why automatism should have
become associated with consciousness, and this so intimately that every
change in the sequence _A, B, C_, &c., is accompanied by a particular
and corresponding change in the sequence _a, b, c_, &c. Thus, to take a
definite illustration, if on seeing the sun I think of a paper on solar
physics, and from this pass to thinking of Mr. Norman Lockyer, and from
this to speculating on the probability of certain supposed elements
being really compounds, there is here a definite causal connexion in the
sequence of my _thoughts_. But it is the last extravagance of absurdity
to tell me that the accompanying causal sequences going on in my brain
happen to have exactly corresponded to the sequences which were taking
place in the mind, the two trains of sequences being each definite and
coherent in themselves, and yet each proceeding link for link in lines
parallel with the other. Without some theory of pre-established
harmony--which, of course, it is no part of automatism to entertain--it
would, on the doctrine of chances alone, be impossible to suppose that
the causal sequences in the brain always happen to be just those which,
by running link for link with another set of causal sequences taking
place in the mind, enable both the series to be definite and coherent in
themselves. Therefore, before reason can allow the theory of automatism
to pass, it must be told how this wonderful fact of parallelism is to be
explained. There must be _some_ connexion between the intrinsically
coherent series _A, B, C_ and the no less intrinsically coherent
sequence _a, b, c_, which may be taken as an explanation why they
coincide each to each. What is this connexion? We do not know; but we
have now seen that, whatever it is, it cannot be an ordinary causal
connexion--first, because the doctrine of the conservation of energy
makes it incumbent on us to believe that the procession of physical
cause and effect is complete within the region of brain--a closed
circle, as it were, from which no energy can, without argumentative
suicide, be supposed to escape into the region of mind; and next,
because, even were this difficulty disregarded, it is unaccountable that
the causative influence (whatever it is supposed to be), which passes
over from the region of physics into that of psychics, should be such as
to render the psychical series coherent in itself, when on the physical
side the series must be determined by purely physical conditions,
having no reference whatsoever to psychical requirements.

Thus it is argumentatively impossible for Materialism to elude the
necessity of explaining the kind of connexion which it supposes to
subsist between neurosis and psychosis; and forasmuch as the above
considerations clearly show this connexion cannot be accepted as one of
ordinary causality without some answer being given to the questions
which reason has to ask, Materialism must be ruled out of court if she
fails to respond to the demand. But it is no less clearly impossible
that she can respond to the demand, and therefore at the bar of
Philosophy Materialism must be pronounced, for this as well as for the
reasons previously cited, conspicuously inadequate to account for the
facts.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 4: Professor Flint, _Antitheistic Theories_, p. 99.]

[Footnote 5: _Philosophy of Religion_, pp. 95, 99, and 101.]

[Footnote 6: British Association Report, 1879, p. 28.]

[Footnote 7: British Association Report, 1868. Trans. of Sections, p.
5.]




CHAPTER III.

MONISM.


We have seen, then, that both the alternative theories of Spiritualism
and Materialism are found, when carefully examined, to be so beset with
difficulties of a necessary and fundamental kind, that it is impossible
to entertain either without closing our eyes to certain contradictions
which they severally and inherently present. We may, indeed, go even
further than this, and affirm that to suppose mind the cause of motion
or motion the cause of mind is equally to suppose that which in its very
nature as a supposition is neither true nor untrue, but nonsensical.
For, as Prof. Clifford has said in his essay on _Body and Mind_,--

     'It may be conceived that, at the same time with every exercise of
     volition, there is a disturbance of the physical laws; but this
     disturbance, being perceptible to me, would be a physical fact
     accompanying the volition, and could not be volition itself, which
     is not perceptible to me. Whether there is such a disturbance of
     the physical laws or no is a question of fact to which we have the
     best of reasons for giving a negative answer; but the assertion
     that another man's volition, a feeling in his consciousness which
     I cannot perceive, is part of the train of physical facts which I
     may perceive,--this is neither true nor untrue, but nonsense; it is
     a combination of words whose corresponding ideas will not go
     together[8].'

And seeing that the correlatives are in each case the same, it is
similarly 'nonsense' to assert the converse proposition: or, in other
words, it is equally nonsense to speak of mental action causing cerebral
action, or of cerebral action causing mental action--nonsense of the
same kind as it would be to speak of the _Pickwick Papers_ causing a
storm at sea, or the eruption of a volcano causing the forty-seventh
proposition in the first book of Euclid.

We see, then, that two of the three possible theories of things contain
the elements of their own destruction: when carefully analyzed, both
these theories are found to present inherent contradictions. On this
account the third, or only alternative theory, comes to us with a large
antecedent presumption in its favour. For it comes to us, as it were, on
a clear field, or with the negative advantage of having no logical
rivals to contend with. The other two suggestions having been weighed in
the balance and found wanting, we are free to look to the new-comer as
quite unopposed. This new-comer must, indeed, be interrogated as
carefully as his predecessors, and, like them, must be judged upon his
own merits. But as he constitutes our last possible hope of solving the
question which he professes himself able to solve, the absolute failure
of his predecessors entitles him to a patient hearing. By the method of
exclusion his voice is now the only voice that remains to be heard, and
unless it can speak to better purpose than the others, we shall have no
alternative but to abandon the facts as inexplicable, or to confess that
it is necessarily impossible for the human mind ever to arrive at any
theory of things.

Before proceeding to state or to examine this third and last of the
suggested theories, it is desirable--in order still further to define
its _status a priori_--that I should exhibit the reason why the two
other suggestions have necessarily failed. For to my mind it is
perfectly obvious that this reason is to be found, and found only, in
the fact that they are both dualistic. The inherent, the fatal, and the
closely similar difficulties which attach to both the dualistic
theories, attach to them merely because they _are_ dualistic. The
'nonsense' of each of them is really identical, and arises only because
they both make the same irrational attempt to find more in the effect
than they have put into the cause. In other words, both the dualistic
theories suppose that the physical chains of causation is complete
within itself, and that the mental chain is also complete within itself:
yet they both proceed to the contradiction that one of these chains is
able to allow some of its causal influence to escape, as it were, in
order to constitute the other chain. It makes no difference, in point
of logic, whether such an escape is supposed to take place from the
physical chain (materialism) or from the mental chain (spiritualism): in
either case the fundamental principle of causality is alike
impugned--the principle, that is, of there being an equivalency between
cause and effect, such that you cannot get more out of your effect than
you have put into your cause. Both these dualistic theories, although
they take opposite views as to which of the two chains of causation is
the cause of the other, nevertheless agree in supposing that there _are_
two chains of causation, and that one of them _does_ act causally upon
the other: and it is in this matter of their common consent that they
both commit suicide. Every process in the physical sphere must be
supposed to have its equations satisfied within that sphere: else the
doctrine of the conservation of energy would be contravened, and thus
the causation contemplated could no longer be contemplated as physical.
Similarly, every process in the mental sphere must be supposed to have
its equations satisfied within that sphere: else the causation
contemplated could no longer be contemplated as mental: some of the
equations must be supposed not to have been satisfied within the mental
sphere, but to have been carried over into the physical sphere--thus to
have either created or destroyed certain quantities of energy within
that sphere, and thus, also, to have introduced elements of endless
confusion into the otherwise orderly system of Nature.

From this vice of radical contradiction, to which both the dualistic
theories are committed, the monistic theory is free. Moreover, as we
shall immediately find, it is free to combine the elements of truth
which severally belong to both the other theories. These other theories
are each concerned with what they see upon different sides of the same
shield. The facts which they severally receive they severally report,
and their reports appear to contradict each other. But truth can never
be really in contradiction with other truth; and it is reserved for
Monism, by taking a simultaneous view of both sides, to reconcile the
previously apparent contradictions. For these and other reasons, which
will unfold themselves as we proceed, I fully agree with the late
Professor Clifford where he says of this theory--'It is not merely a
speculation, but is a result to which all the greatest minds that have
studied this question (the relation between body and mind) in the right
way have gradually been approximating for a long time.' This theory is,
as we have already seen, that mental phenomena and physical phenomena,
although apparently diverse, are really identical.

If we thus unite in a higher synthesis the elements both of spiritualism
and of materialism, we obtain a product which satisfies every fact of
feeling on the one hand, and of observation on the other. We have only
to suppose that the antithesis between mind and motion--subject and
object--is itself phenomenal or apparent: not absolute or real. We have
only to suppose that the seeming duality is relative to our modes of
apprehension: and, therefore, that any change taking place in the mind,
and any corresponding change taking place in the brain, are really not
two changes, but one change. When a violin is played upon we hear a
musical sound, and at the same time we see a vibration of the strings.
Relatively to our consciousness, therefore, we have here two sets of
changes, which appear to be very different in kind; yet we know that in
an absolute sense they are one and the same: we know that the diversity
in consciousness is created only by the difference in our mode of
perceiving the same events--whether we see or whether we hear the
vibration of the strings. Similarly, we may suppose that a vibration of
nerve-strings and a process of thought are really one and the same
event, which is dual or diverse only in relation to our modes of
perceiving it.

Or, to take another and a better illustration, in an Edison lamp the
light which is emitted from the burner may be said indifferently to be
caused by the number of vibrations per second going on in the carbon, or
by the temperature of the carbon; for this rate of vibration could not
take place in the carbon without constituting that degree of temperature
which affects our eyes as luminous. Similarly, a train of thought may be
said indifferently to be caused by brain-action or by mind-action; for,
_ex hypothesi_, the one could not take place without the other. Now when
we contemplate the phenomena of volition by themselves, it is as though
we were contemplating the phenomena of light by themselves: volition is
produced by mind in brain, just as light is produced by temperature in
carbon. And just as we may correctly speak of light as the cause, say,
of a photograph, so we may correctly speak of volition as the cause of
bodily movement. That particular kind of physical activity which takes
place in the carbon could not take place without the light which causes
a photograph; and, similarly, that particular kind of physical activity
which takes place in the brain could not take place without the volition
which causes a bodily movement. So that volition is as truly a cause of
bodily movement as is the physical activity of the brain; seeing that,
in an absolute sense, the cause is one and the same. But if we once
clearly perceive that what in a relative sense we know as volition is,
in a similar sense, the cause of bodily movement, we terminate the
question touching the freedom of the will. It thus becomes a mere matter
of phraseology whether we speak of the will determining, or being
determined by, changes going on in the external world; just as it is but
a matter of phraseology whether we speak of temperature determining, or
being determined by, molecular vibration. All the requirements alike of
the free-will and of the bond-will hypotheses are thus satisfied by a
synthesis which comprises them both. On the one hand, it would be as
impossible for an _un_conscious automaton to do the work or to perform
the adjustments of a conscious agent, as it would be for an Edison lamp
to give out light and cause a photograph when not heated by an electric
current. On the other hand, it would be as impossible for the will to
originate bodily motion without the occurrence of a strictly physical
process of cerebration, as it would be for light to shine in an Edison
lamp which had been deprived of its carbon-burner.

The great advantage of this theory is, that it supposes only one stream
of causation, in which both mind and motion are simultaneously
concerned. The theory, therefore, escapes all the difficulties and
contradictions with which both spiritualism and materialism are beset.
Thus, motion is supposed to be producing nothing but motion;
mind-changes nothing but mind-changes--both producing both
simultaneously: neither could be what it is without the other, because
without the other neither could be the cause which in fact it is.
Impossible, therefore, is the supposition of the materialist that
consciousness is adventitious, or that in the absence of mind the
changes of the brain could be what they are; for it belongs to the very
causation of these movements that they should have a mental side. And
equally impossible is the supposition of the spiritualist that the
cerebral processes are adventitious, or that in the absence of brain the
changes of the mind could be what they are; for it belongs to the very
causation of these changes that they should have a material side.
Furthermore, the use of mind to animals and to men is thus rendered
apparent; for intelligent volition is thus shown to be a true cause of
adjustive movement, in that the cerebration which it involves could not
otherwise be possible: the causation would not otherwise be complete.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 8: _Lectures and Essays_, vol. ii. pp. 56-7.]




CHAPTER IV.

THE WORLD AS AN EJECT.


In the Introduction to this essay I have sought to show that there are,
for the purposes of practical discussion, but three theories of the
World of Being. There is, first, the theory of Materialism, which
supposes matter in motion to be the ultimate or self-existing Reality,
and, therefore, the cause of mind. Next, there is the theory of
Spiritualism, which supposes mind to be the ultimate Reality, and,
therefore, the cause of matter in motion. Lastly, there is the theory of
Monism which supposes matter in motion to be substantially identical
with mind, and, therefore, that as between mind and matter in motion
there is no causal relation either way. In the foregoing chapters I have
considered these three theories, and argued that of them the
last-mentioned is the only one which satisfies all the facts of feeling
on the one hand, and of observation on the other. The theory of Monism
alone is able to explain, without inherent contradiction, the phenomena
both of the subjective and objective spheres.

It is my present purpose to extend the considerations already presented.
Assuming the theory of Monism, I desire to ascertain the result to which
it will lead when applied to the question whether we ought to regard the
external world as of a character mental or non-mental. As observed in my
Rede Lecture (_supra_, p. 33), this question has already been considered
by the late Professor Clifford, who decided that on the monistic theory
the probability pointed towards the external world being of a character
non-mental; that, although the whole universe is composed of
'mind-stuff,' the universe as a whole is mindless. This decision I then
briefly criticized; it is now my object to contemplate the matter
somewhat more in detail.

I will assume, on account of reasons previously given, that when we
speak of matter in motion we do not at all know what it is that moves,
nor do we know at all what it is that we mean by motion. Therefore if,
as unknown quantities, we call matter _a_ and motion _b_, all we are
entitled to affirm is that _a + b = z_, where _z_ is a known quantity,
or mind. Obversely stated, we may say that the known quantity _z_ is
capable of being resolved into the unknown _a + b_. But, inasmuch as
both _a_ and _b_ are unknown, we may simplify matters by regarding their
sum as a single unknown quantity _x_, which we take to be substantially
identical with its obverse aspect known as _z_.

Here, then, are our data. The theory of Monism teaches that what we
perceive as matter in motion, _x_, is the obverse of what we know as
mind, _z_. What, then, do we know of _z_? In the first place, we well
know that this is the only entity with which we are acquainted, so to
speak, at first hand; all our knowledge of _x_ (which is the only other
knowledge we possess) is possible only in so far as we are able to
translate it into terms of _z_. In the next place, we know that _z_ is
itself an entity of the most enormous complexity. Standing as a symbol
of the whole range of individual subjectivity, it may be said to
constitute for each individual the symbol of his own personality--or the
sum total of his conscious life. Now each individual knows by direct
knowledge that his conscious life is, as I have said, of enormous
complexity, and that numberless ingredients of feeling, thought, and
volition are therein combined in numberless ways. Therefore the symbol
_z_ may be considered as the sum of innumerable constituent parts,
grouped _inter se_ in numberless systems of more or less complexity.

From these considerations we arrive at the following conclusions. The
theory of Monism teaches that all _z_ is _x_; but it does not,
therefore, necessarily teach that all _x_ is _z_. Nevertheless, it does
teach that if all _x_ is not _z_, this must be because _x_ is _z_,
_plus_ something more than _z_, as a little thought will be sufficient
to show. Thus, the four annexed diagrams exhaust the logical
possibilities of any case, where the question is as to the inclusion or
exclusion of one quantity by another. In Fig. 1 the two quantities are
coincident; in Fig 2 the one is wholly included by the other; in Fig. 3
it is partially included; and in Fig. 4 wholly excluded. Now in the
present case, and upon the data supplied, the logical possibilities are
exhausted by Figs. 1 and 2. For, upon these data, Figs. 3 and 4
obviously represent logical impossibilities; no part of Mind can,
according to these data, stand outside the limits of Matter and Motion.
Therefore, if the Ego is not coincident with the Non-ego (or if all _x_
is not _z_, as in Fig. 1), this can only be because the Ego is less
extensive than the Non-ego (or because _x_ is _z plus_ something more
than _z_, as in Fig. 2).

[Illustration: Fig. 1]

[Illustration: Fig. 2]

[Illustration: Fig. 3]

[Illustration: Fig. 4]

Of these two logical possibilities Idealism, in its most extreme form,
may adopt the first. For Idealism in this form may hold that apart from
the Ego there is no external world; that outside of _z_ there is no _x_;
that the only _esse_ is the _percipi_. But, as very few persons
nowadays are prepared to go the length of seriously maintaining that in
actual fact there is no external world save in so far as this is
perceived by the individual mind, I need not wait to consider this
possibility. We are thus practically shut up to a consideration of the
possibility marked 2.

[Illustration: Fig. 5]

[Illustration: Fig. 6]

[Illustration: Fig. 7]

The theory of Monism, then, teaches that _x_ is _z_ _plus_ something
more than _z_; and therefore it becomes a matter of great moment to
consider the probable nature of the overplus. For it obviously does not
follow that because _x_ is greater than _z_ in a logical sense,
therefore _x_ must be greater than _z_ in a psychological sense. Save
upon the theory of Idealism (with which Monism is not specially
concerned) the amount (whatever it may be) wherein _x_ is greater than
_z_, may not present any psychological signification at all. We may find
that the surface of our globe is considerably larger than that of the
dry land, and yet it may not follow that the mental-life to be met with
in the sea is psychologically superior to that which occurs on dry land.
If, therefore, we represent by comparative shading degrees of
psychological excellence, it is evident that the theory of Monism must
entertain the three possibilities indicated diagrammatically in Figs. 5,
6, and 7. It makes no difference what the comparative areas of _x_ and
_z_ may be, or whether _x_ be uniformly shaded throughout its extent.
All we have so far to notice is that the fact of logical inclusion does
not necessarily carry with it the implication of psychological
superiority.

Next we must notice that besides our own subjectivities, we have
cognizance of being surrounded by many other inferred subjectivities
more or less like in kind (i. e. other human minds); and also yet many
other inferred subjectivities more or less unlike, but all inferior (i.
e. the minds of lower animals, young children, and idiots). Following
Clifford, I will call these inferred subjectivities by the name of
ejects, and assign to them the symbol _y_. Thus, in the following
discussion, _x_ = the objective world, _y_ = the ejective world, and _z_
= subjective world. Now, the theory of Monism supposes that _x_, _y_,
and _z_ are all alike in kind, but present no definite teaching as to
how far they may differ in degree. We may, however, at once allow that
between the psychological value of _z_ and that of _y_ there is a wide
difference of degree; and also that, while the value of _z_ is a fixed
quantity, that of _y_ varies greatly in the different parts of the area
_y_. Our scheme, therefore, will now adopt this form--

[Illustration]

But the important question remains how we ought to shade _x_. According
to Clifford, this ought scarcely to be shaded at all, while according to
theologians (and theists generally) it ought to be shaded so much more
deeply than either _y_ or _z_, that the joint representation in one
diagram would only be possible by choosing for the shading of _x_ a
colour different from that employed for _y_ and _z_, and assigning to
that colour a representative value higher than that assigned to the
other in the ratio of one to infinity. It will be my object to estimate
the relative probability of these rival estimates of the psychological
value of _x_.

Starting from _z_ as our centre, we know that this is an isolated system
of subjectivity, and hence we infer that all _y_ is composed of
analogous systems, resembling one another as to their isolation, and
differing only in their degrees of psychological value. Now this,
translated into terms of _x_ (or into terms of objectivity) means that
_z_ is an isolated system of matter in motion, and that the same has to
be said of all the constituent parts of _y_. In other words, both
subjectivity and ejectivity are only known under the condition of being
isolated from objectivity; which, obversely considered, means that the
matter in motion here concerned is temporarily separated off from the
rest of the objective world, in such wise that it forms a distinct
system of its own. If any part of the objective world rudely forces its
way within the machinery of that system, it is at the risk of
disarranging the machinery and stopping its work--as is the case when a
bullet enters the brain. Such converse as the brain normally holds with
the external world, is held through the appointed channels of the
senses, whereby appropriate causation is supplied to keep the otherwise
isolated system at work. We know, from physiological evidence, that when
such external causation is withheld, the isolated system ceases to work;
therefore, the isolation, although complete under one point of view,
under another point of view is incomplete. It is complete only in the
sense in which the isolation of a machine is complete--i. e. it is in
itself a working system, yet its working is ultimately dependent upon
causation supplied from without in certain appropriate ways. This truth
is likewise testified to on the obverse aspect of psychology. For
analysis shows that all our mental processes (however complex they may
be internally) are ultimately dependent on impressions of the external
world gained through the senses. Whether regarded objectively or
subjectively, therefore, we find that it is the business of the isolated
system to elaborate, by its internal processes, the raw materials which
are supplied to it from without. Seeing, then, that the isolation of the
system is thus only partial, we may best apply to it the term
circumscribed. Such partial isolation or circumscription of matter in
motion--so that it shall in itself constitute a little working
microcosm--appears to be the first condition to the being of a
subjective personality. Why, then, does not the working of a machine
present a subjective side?

Our answer to this question is to be found in the following
considerations. We are going upon the hypothesis that all mind is matter
in motion, and that all matter in motion is mind--or, as Clifford
phrased it, that all the external world is composed of mind-stuff. No
matter how lightly we may shade _x_, we are assuming that it must be
shaded, and not left perfectly white. Now, both mind and matter in
motion admit of degrees: first as to quantity, next as to velocity, and
lastly as to complexity. But the degrees of matter in motion are found,
in point of observable fact, not to correspond with those of mind, save
in the last particular of complexity, where there is unquestionably an
evident correspondence. Therefore it is that a machine, although
conforming to the prime condition of subjectivity in being a
circumscribed system of matter in motion, nevertheless does not attain
to subjectivity: the _x_ does not rise to _z_ because the internal
processes of _x_ are not sufficiently intricate, or their intricacy is
not of the appropriate kind. From which it follows that although, as I
have said, all matter in motion is mind, merely as matter in motion (or
irrespective of the kinds and degrees of both) it may not necessarily be
mind in the elaborated form of consciousness: it may only be the raw
material of mind--or, as Clifford called it, mind-stuff. Thus, although
all conscious volition is matter in motion, it does not follow that all
matter in motion is conscious volition. Which serves to restate the
question as to how far it is probable, or improbable, that all matter in
motion is conscious volition--i.e. how deeply we ought to shade _x_.

Well, the first thing to be considered in answering this question is
that, according to the theory of Monism, we _know_ that it is within the
range of possibility for matter in motion to reach a level of intricacy
which shall yield conscious volition, and even self-conscious thought of
an extremely high order of development. Therefore, the only question is
as to whether it is possible, or in any way probable, that matter in
motion as occurring in _x_ resembles, in point of intricacy, matter in
motion as occurring in _z_. Professor Clifford perceived that this is
the core of the question, and staked the whole answer to it on an
extremely simple issue. He said that unless we can show in the
disposition of heavenly bodies some morphological resemblance to the
structure of a human brain, we are precluded from rationally
entertaining any probability that self-conscious volition belongs to the
universe. Obviously, this way of presenting the case is so grossly
illogical that even the exigencies of popular exposition cannot be held
to justify the presentation. For aught that we can know to the contrary,
not merely the highly specialized structure of the human brain, but even
that of nervous matter in general, may only be one of a thousand
possible ways in which the material and dynamical conditions required
for the apparition of self-consciousness can be secured. To imagine that
the human brain of necessity exhausts these possibilities is in the last
degree absurd. Therefore, we may suggest the following presentation of
Clifford's case as one that is less obviously inadequate:--if any
resemblance to the material and dynamical conditions of the microcosm
can be detected in the macrocosm, we should have good reason to ascribe
to the latter those attributes of subjectivity which we know as
belonging to the former; but if no such resemblance can be traced, we
shall have some reason to suppose that these attributes do not belong to
the universe. Even this, however, I should regard as much too wide a
statement of the case. To take the particular conditions under which
alone subjectivity is known to occur upon a single planet as exhausting
the possibilities of its occurrence elsewhere, is too flagrant a use of
the method of simple enumeration to admit of a moment's countenance.
Even the knowledge that we have of the two great conditions under which
terrestrial subjectivities occur--circumscription and complexity--is
only empirical. It may well be that elsewhere (or apart from the
conditions imposed by nervous tissue) subjectivity is possible
irrespective both of circumscription and of complexity. Therefore,
properly or logically regarded, the great use of the one exhibition of
subjectivity furnished to human experience, is the proof thus furnished
that subjectivity is possible under _some_ conditions; and the utmost
which on the grounds of such proof human experience is entitled to argue
is, that _probably_, if subjectivity is possible elsewhere, its
possibility is given by those conditions of circumscription and
complexity in the material and dynamical relations concerned, which we
find to be the invariable and quantitative concomitants of subjectivity
within experience. But this is a widely different thing from saying that
the only kind of such circumscription and complexity--or the only
disposition of these relations--which can present a subjective side is
that which is found in the structures and functions of a nervous system.

Now, if we fix our attention merely on this matter of complexity, and
refuse to be led astray by obviously false analogies of a more special
kind, I think there can be no question that the macrocosm does furnish
amply sufficient opportunity, as it were, for the presence of
subjectivity, even if it be assumed that subjectivity can only be
yielded by an order of complexity analogous to that of a nervous system.
For, considering the material and dynamical system of the universe as a
whole, it is obvious that the complexity presented is greater than that
of any of its parts. Not only is it true that all these parts are
included in the whole, and that even the visible sidereal system alone
presents movements of enormous intricacy[9], but we find, for instance,
that even within the limits of this small planet there is presented to
actual observation a peculiar form of circumscribed complex, fully
comparable with that of the individual brain, and yet external to each
individual brain. For the so-called 'social organism,' although composed
of innumerable individual personalities, is, with regard to each of its
constituent units, a part of the objective world--just as the human
brain would be, were each of its constituent cells of a construction
sufficiently complex to yield a separate personality.

If to this it be objected that, as a matter of fact, the social organism
does not possess a self-conscious personality, I will give a twofold
answer. In the first place, Who told the objector that it has not? For
aught that any one of its constituent personalities can prove to the
contrary, this social organism may possess self-conscious personality of
the most vivid character: its constituent human minds may be born into
it and die out of it as do the constituent cells of the human body: it
may feel the throes of war and famine, rejoice in the comforts of peace
and plenty: it may appreciate the growth of civilization as its passage
from childhood to maturity. If this at first sight appears a grotesque
supposition, we must remember that it would appear equally so to ascribe
such possibilities to the individual brain, were it not for the
irrelevant accident of this particular form of complex standing in such
relation to our own subjectivity that we are able to verify the fact of
its ejectivity. Thus, for aught that we can tell to the contrary, Comte
may have been even more justified than his followers suppose, in
teaching the personification of Humanity.

But, in the next place, if the social organism is not endowed with
personality, this may be for either one of two reasons. All the
conditions required for attaining so high a level of psychical
perfection may not be here present; or else the level of psychical
perfection may be higher than that which we know as personality. This
latter alternative will be considered in another relation by-and-by, so
I will not dwell upon it now. But with reference to all these possible
contingencies, I may observe that we are not without clear indications
of the great fact that the high order of complexity which has been
reached by the social organism _is_ accompanied by evidence of something
which we may least dimly define as resembling subjectivity. In
numberless ways, which I need not wait to enumerate, we perceive that
society exhibits the phenomena both of thought and conduct. And these
phenomena cannot always be explained by regarding them as the sum of the
thoughts and actions of its constituent individuals--or, at least, they
can only be so regarded by conceding that the thoughts and actions of
the constituent individuals, when thus _summated_, yield a different
product from that which would be obtained by a merely arithmetical
computation of the constituent parts: the composite product differs from
its component elements, as H_2O differs from 2H + O. The general truth
of this remark will, I believe, be appreciated by all historians.
Seeing that ideas are often, as it is said, 'in the air' before they are
condensed in the mind of individual genius, we habitually speak of the
'Zeit-geist' as the product of a kind of collective psychology, which is
something other than the mere sum of all the individual minds of a
generation. That is to say, we regard society as an eject, and the more
that a man studies the thought and conduct of society, the more does he
become convinced that we are right in so regarding it. Of course this
eject is manifestly unlike that which we form of another individual
mind: it is much more general, vague, and so far unlike the pattern of
our own subjectivity that even to ascribe to it the important attribute
of personality is felt, as we have just seen, to approach the grotesque.
Still, in this vague and general way we do ascribe to society ejective
existence: we habitually think of the whole world of human thought and
feeling as a psychological complex, which is other than, and more than,
a mere shorthand enumeration of all the thoughts and feelings of all
individual human beings.

The ejective existence thus ascribed to society serves as a
stepping-stone to the yet more vague and general ascription of such
existence to the Cosmos. At first, indeed, or during the earliest stages
of culture, the ascription of ejective existence to the external world
is neither vague nor general: on the contrary, it is most distinct and
specific. Beginning in the rudest forms of animism, where every natural
process admits of being immediately attributed to the volitional agency
of an unseen spirit, anthropomorphism sets out upon its long course of
development, which proceeds _pari passu_ with the development of
abstract thought. Man, as it has been truly said, universally makes God
in his own image; and it is difficult to see how the case could be
otherwise. Universally the eject must assume the pattern of the subject,
and it is only in the proportion that this pattern presents the features
of abstract thinking that the image which it throws becomes less and
less man-like. Hence, as Mr. Fiske has shown in detail, so soon as
anthropomorphism has assumed its highest state of development, it begins
to be replaced by a continuous growth of 'deanthropomorphism,' which,
passing through polytheism into monotheism, eventually ends in a
progressive 'purification' of theism--by which is meant a progressive
metamorphosis of the theistic conception, tending to remove from Deity
the attributes of Humanity. The last of these attributes to disappear is
that of personality, and when this final ecdysis has been performed, the
eject which remains is so unlike its original subject, that, as we shall
immediately find, it is extremely difficult to trace any points of
resemblance between them.

Now it is with this perfect, or imago condition of the world-eject, that
we have to do. Mr. Herbert Spencer, in what I consider the profoundest
reaches of his philosophic thought, has well shown, on the one hand,
how impossible it is to attribute to Deity any of the specific
attributes of mind as known to ourselves subjectively; and, on the other
hand, how it is possible to conceive 'symbolically' that the universe
may be instinct with a 'quasi-psychical' principle, as greatly
transcending personality as personality transcends mechanical
motion[10]. Accepting, then, the world-eject in this its highest
conceivable stage of evolution, I desire to contemplate it under the
light of the monistic theory.

We have seen that, whether we look upon the subjective or objective face
of personality, we find that personality arises from limitation--or, as
I have previously termed it, circumscription. Now, we have no evidence,
nor are we able to conceive, of the external world as limited;
consequently we are not able to conceive, of the world-eject as
personal. But, inasmuch as personality arises only from limitation, the
conclusion that the world-eject is impersonal does not tend to show that
it is of lower psychical value than conscious personality: on the
contrary, it tends to show that it is probably of higher psychical
value. True, we are not able to conceive actually of mind as impersonal;
but we can see that this merely arises from our only experience of mind
being given under conditions of personality; and, as just observed, it
is possible to conceive symbolically that there may be a form of mind as
greatly transcending personality as personality transcends mechanical
motion.

Now, although we cannot conceive of such a mind actually, we may most
probably make the nearest approach to conceiving of it truly, by
_provisionally_ ascribing to it the highest attributes of mind as known
to ourselves, or the attributes which belong to human personality. Just
as a thinking insect would derive a better, or more true, conception of
human personality by considering it ejectively than by considering it
objectively (or by considering the mind-processes as distinguished from
the brain-processes), so, if there is a form of mind immeasurably
superior to our own, we may probably gain a more faithful--howsoever
still inadequate--conception of it by contemplating its operations
ejectively than by doing so objectively. I will, therefore, speak of the
world-eject as presenting conscious volition, on the understanding that
if _x_ does not present either consciousness or volition, this must
be--according to the fundamental assumption of psychism on which we are
now proceeding--because _x_ presents attributes at least as much higher
than consciousness or volition as these are higher than mechanical
motion. For when we consider the utmost that our conscious volition is
able to accomplish in the way of contrivance--how limited its knowledge,
how short its duration, how restricted its range, and how imperfect its
adaptations--we can only conclude that _if_ the ultimate constitution of
all things is pyschical, the philosophy of the Cosmos becomes a
'philosophy of the Unconscious' only because it is a philosophy of the
Superconscious.

Now, if once we feel ourselves able to transcend the preliminary--and
doubtless very considerable--difficulty of symbolically conceiving the
world-eject as super-conscious, and (because not limited) also
super-personal, I think there can be no question that the world-object
furnishes overwhelming proof of psychism. I candidly confess that I am
not myself able to overcome the preliminary difficulty in question. By
discharging the elements of personality and conscious volition from the
world-eject, I appear to be discharging from my conception of mind all
that most distinctively belongs to that conception; and thus I seem to
be brought back again to the point from which we started: the
world-eject appears to have again resolved itself into the unknown
quantity _x_. But here we must distinguish between actual conception and
symbolical conception. Although it is unquestionably true that I can
form no actual conception of Mind save as an eject of personality and
conscious volition, it is a question whether I am not able to form a
symbolical conception of Mind as thus extended. For I know that
consciousness, implying as it does continual change in serial order of
circumscribed mental processes, is not (symbolically considered) the
highest conceivable exhibition of Mind; and just as a mathematician is
able to deal symbolically with space of _n_ dimensions, while only able
really to conceive of space as limited to three dimensions, so I feel
that I ought not to limit the abstract possibilities of mental being by
what I may term the accidental conditions of my own being.

I need scarcely wait to show why it appears to me that if this position
is granted, the world-object furnishes, as I have said, overwhelming
proof of psychism; for this proof has been ably presented by many other
writers. There is first the antecedent improbability that the human mind
should be the highest manifestation of subjectivity in this universe of
infinite objectivity. There is next the fact that throughout this
universe of infinite objectivity--so far, at least, as human observation
can extend--there is unquestionable evidence of some one integrating
principle, whereby all its many and complex parts are correlated with
one another in such wise that the result is universal order. And if we
take any part of the whole system--such as that of organic nature on
this planet--to examine in more detail, we find that it appears to be
instinct with contrivance. So to speak, wherever we tap organic nature,
it seems to flow with purpose; and, as we shall presently see, upon the
monistic theory the evidence of purpose is here in no way attenuated by
a full acceptance of any of the 'mechanical' explanations furnished by
science. Now, these large and important facts of observation
unquestionably point, as just observed, to some one integrating
principle as pervading the Cosmos; and, if so, we can scarcely be wrong
in supposing that among all our conceptions it must hold nearest kinship
to that which is our highest conception of an integrating cause--viz.,
the conception of psychism. Assuredly no human mind could either have
devised or maintained the working of even a fragment of Nature; and,
therefore, it seems but reasonable to conclude that the integrating
principle of the whole--the Spirit, as it were, of the Universe--must be
something which, while as I have said holding nearest kinship with our
highest conception of disposing power, must yet be immeasurably superior
to the psychism of man. The world-eject thus becomes invested with a
psychical value as greatly transcending in magnitude that of the human
mind, as the material frame of the universe transcends in its magnitude
the material frame of the human body. Therefore, without in any way
straining the theory of Monism, we may provisionally shade _x_ more
deeply than _z_, and this in some immeasurable degree.

       *       *       *       *       *

One other matter remains to be considered with reference to this
world-eject as sanctioned by Monism. It leaves us free to regard all
natural causation as a direct exhibition of psychism. The prejudice
against anything approaching a theistic interpretation of the Universe
nowadays arises chiefly from the advance of physical science having
practically revealed the ubiquity of natural causes. It is felt that
when a complete explanation of any given phenomenon has been furnished
in terms of these causes, there is no need to go further; the phenomenon
has been rendered intelligible on its mechanical side, and therefore it
is felt that we have no reason to suppose that it presents a mental
side--any supplementary causation of a mental kind being regarded as
superfluous. Even writers who expressly repudiate this reasoning prove
themselves to be habitually under its influence; for we constantly find
that such writers, after conceding the mechanical explanations as far as
these have been _proved_, take their stand upon the more intricate
phenomena of Nature where, as yet, the mechanical explanations are not
forthcoming. Whether it be at the origin of life, the origin of
sentiency, of instinct, of rationality, of morality, or of religion,
these writers habitually argue that here, at least, the purely
mechanical interpretations fail; and that here, consequently, there is
still room left for a psychical interpretation. Of course the pleading
for theism thus supplied is seen by others to be of an extremely feeble
quality; for while, on the one hand, it rests only upon ignorance of
natural causation (as distinguished from any knowledge of super-natural
causation), on the other hand, abundant historical analogies are
available to show that it is only a question of time when pleading of
this kind will become more and more restricted in its subject-matter,
till eventually it be altogether silenced. But the pleading which Monism
is here able to supply can never be silenced.

For, according to Monism, all matter in motion is mind; and, therefore,
matter in motion is merely the objective revelation, _to_ us and _for_
us, of that which in its subjective aspect--or in its ultimate
reality--is mind. Just as the operations of my friend's mind can only be
revealed to me through the mechanical operations of his body, so it may
very well be that the operations of the Supreme Mind (supposing such to
exist) can only be revealed to me through the mechanical operations of
Nature. The only difference between the two cases is that while I am
able, in the case of my friend's mind, to elicit responses of mechanical
movement having a definite and intended relation to the operations of my
own mind, similarly expressed to him; such is not the case with Nature.
With the friend-eject I am able to _converse_; but not so with the
world-eject[11]. This great difference, however, although obviously
depriving me of any such direct corroboration of psychism in the
world-eject as that which I thus derive of psychism in the friend-eject,
ought not to be regarded by me as amounting, in the smallest degree, to
_disproof_ of psychism in the world-eject. The fact that I am not able
to converse with the world-eject is merely a negative fact, and should
not be allowed to tell against any probability (otherwise derived) in
favour of psychism as belonging to that eject. There may be a thousand
very good reasons why I should be precluded from such converse--some of
which, indeed, I can myself very clearly perceive.

The importance of Monism in thus enabling us rationally to contemplate
all processes of physical causation as possibly immediate exhibitions
of psychism, is difficult to overrate. For it entirely discharges all
distinction between the mechanical and the mental; so that if physical
science were sufficiently advanced to yield a full natural explanation
of all the phenomena within human experience, mankind would be in a
position to gain as complete a knowledge as is theoretically possible of
the psychological character of the world-eject. Already we are able to
perceive the immense significance of being able to regard any sequence
of natural causation as the merely phenomenal aspect of the ontological
reality--the merely outward manifestation of an inward meaning. Thus,
for example, I am listening to a sonata of Beethoven's played by Madame
Schumann. Helmholtz tells me all that he knows about the physics and
physiology of the process, both beyond and within my brain. But I feel
that, even if Helmholtz were able to tell me very much more than he can,
so long as he is dealing with these objective explanations, he is at
work only upon the outer skin of the whole matter. The great reality is
the mind of Beethoven communicating to my mind through the complex
intervention of three different brains with their neuro-muscular
systems, and an endless variety of aërial vibrations proceeding from a
pianoforte. The method of communication has nothing more to do with the
reality communicated than have the paper and ink of this essay to do
with the ideas which they serve to convey. In each case a vehicle of
symbols is necessary in order that one mind should communicate with
another; but in both cases this is a vehicle of _symbols_, and nothing
more. Everywhere, therefore, the reality may be psychical, and the
physical symbolic; everywhere matter in motion may be the outward and
visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace.

Take again the case of morality and religion. Because science, by its
theory of evolution, appears to be in a fair way of explaining the
genesis of these things by natural causes, theists are taking alarm; it
is felt by them that if morality can be fully explained by utility, and
religion by superstition, the reality of both is destroyed. But Monism
teaches that such a view is entirely erroneous. For, according to
Monism, the natural causation of morality and religion has nothing
whatever to do with the ultimate truth of either. The natural causation
is merely a record of physical processes, serving to manifest the
psychical processes. Nor can it make any difference, as regards the
ultimate veracity of the moral and religious feelings, that they have
been developed slowly by natural causes; that they were at first grossly
selfish on the one hand, and hideously superstitious on the other; that
they afterwards went through a long series of changes, none of which
therefore can have fully corresponded with external truth; or that even
now they may be both extremely far from any such correspondence. All
that such considerations go to prove is, that it belongs to the natural
method of mental evolution in man that with advancing culture his
ejective interpretations of Nature should more and more nearly
_approximate_ the truth. The world-eject must necessarily vary with the
character of the human subject; but this does not prove that the
ejective interpretation has throughout been wrong in _method_: it only
proves that such interpretation has been imperfect--and necessarily
imperfect--in _application_.

Such, then, I conceive to be one of the most important consequences of
the monistic theory. Namely, that by regarding physical causation as
everywhere but the objective or phenomenal aspect of an ejective or
ontological reality, it furnishes a logical basis for a theory of things
which is at the same time natural and spiritual. On the objective
aspect, the explanations furnished by reason are of necessity physical,
while, on the ejective aspect, such explanations are of necessity
metaphysical--or rather, let us say, hyper-physical. But these two
orders of explanation are different only because their modes of
interpreting the same events are different. The objective explanation
which was given (as we supposed) by Helmholtz of the effects produced on
the human brain by hearing a sonata, was no doubt perfectly sound within
its own category; but the ejective explanation of these same effects
which is given by a musician is equally sound within _its_ category. And
similarly, if instead of the man-object we contemplate the world-object
physical causation becomes but the phenomenal aspect of psychical
causation; the invariability of its sequence becomes but the expression
of intentional order; the iron rigidity of natural law becomes the
sensuous manifestation of an unalterable consistency as belonging to the
Supreme Volition.

My object in this paper has been to show that the views of the late
Professor Clifford concerning the influence of Monism on Theism are
unsound. I am in full agreement with him in believing that Monism is
destined to become the generally accepted theory of things, seeing that
it is the only theory of things which can receive the sanction of
science on the one hand and of feeling on the other. But I disagree with
him in holding that this theory is fraught with implications of an
anti-theistic kind. In my opinion this theory leaves the question of
Theism very much where it was before. That is to say, while not
furnishing any independent proof of Theism, it likewise fails to furnish
any independent disproof. The reason why in Clifford's hands this theory
appeared to furnish independent disproof, was because he persisted in
regarding the world only as an object: he did not entertain the
possibility that the world might also be regarded as an eject. Yet, that
the world, under the theory of Monism, is at least as susceptible of an
ejective as it is of an objective interpretation, I trust that I have
now been able to show. And this is all that I have endeavoured to show.
As a matter of methodical reasoning it appears to me that Monism alone
can only lead to Agnosticism. That is to say, it leaves a clear field of
choice as between Theism and Atheism; and, therefore, to a carefully
reasoning Monist, there are three alternatives open. He may remain a
Monist, and nothing more; in which case he is an agnostic. He may
entertain what appears to him independent evidence in favour of Theism,
and thus he may become a theist. Or he may entertain what appears to him
independent evidence in favour of Atheism, and thus he may become an
atheist. But, in any case, so far as his Monism can carry him, he is
left perfectly free either to regard the world as an object alone, or to
regard the world as also an eject[12].

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 9: If we imagine the visible sidereal system compressed within
the limits of a human skull, so that all its movements which we now
recognize as molar should become molecular, the complexity of such
movement would probably be as great as that which takes place in a human
brain. Yet to this must be added all the molecular movements which are
now going on in the sidereal system, visible and invisible.]

[Footnote 10: _Principles of Psychology_, vol. i. pp. 159-61; _Essays_,
vol. iii. pp. 246-9; and _First Principles_, p. 26.]

[Footnote 11: It is, however, the belief of all religious persons that
even this distinction does not hold. If they are right in their belief,
the distinction would then become one as to the mode of converse. In
this case what is called communion with the Supreme Mind must be
supposed to be a communion _sui generis_: the converse of mind with mind
is here _direct_, or does not require to be translated into the language
of mechanical signs: it is subjective, not ejective. Still, even here we
must believe that the physical aspect accompanies the psychical,
although not necessarily observed. An act of prayer, for example, is, on
its physical aspect, an act of cerebration: so is the answer (supposing
it genuine), in as far as the worshipper is concerned. Thus prayer and
its answer (according to Monism) resemble all the other processes of
Nature in presenting an objective side of strictly physical causation.
Nor is it possible that the case could be otherwise, if _all_ mental
processes consist in physical process, and vice versa. It is obvious
that this consideration has important bearings on the question as to the
physical efficacy of prayer. From a monistic point of view both those
who affirm and those who deny such efficacy are equally in the right,
and equally in the wrong; they are merely quarrelling upon different
sides of the same shield. For, according to Monism, if the theologians
are right in supposing that the Supreme Mind is the hearer of prayer in
any case, they are also right in supposing that the Mind must
necessarily be able to grant what is called physical answers, seeing
that in order to grant _any_ answer (even of the most apparently
spiritual kind) some physical change must be produced, if it be only in
the brain of the petitioner. On the other hand, the scientists are
equally right in maintaining that no physical answer to prayer can be of
the nature of a miracle, or produced independently of strictly physical
causation; for, if so, the physical and the psychical would no longer be
coincident. But, until the scientists are able to perform the hopeless
task of proving where the possibilities of physical causation end, as a
mere matter of abstract speculation and going upon the theory of Monism,
it is evident that the theologians may have any latitude they choose to
claim, both as regards this matter and that of so-called miracles.]

[Footnote 12: It may be explained that by Agnosticism I understand a
theory of things which abstains from either affirming or denying the
existence of God. It thus represents, with regard to Theism, a state of
suspended judgement; and all it undertakes to affirm is, that, upon
existing evidence, the being of God is unknown. But the term Agnosticism
is frequently used in a widely different sense, as implying belief that
the being of God is not merely now unknown, but must always remain
unknowable. It is therefore often represented that Mr. Herbert Spencer,
in virtue of his doctrine of the Unknowable, is a kind of apostle of
Agnosticism. This, however, I conceive to be a great mistake. The
distinctive features of Mr. Spencer's doctrine of the Unknowable are not
merely non-agnostic, but anti-agnostic. For the doctrine affirms that we
have this much knowledge of God--namely, that if He exists, He must for
ever be unknown. Without question, this would be a most important piece
of definite knowledge with regard to Deity, negative though it be; and,
therefore, any man who holds it has no right to be called an agnostic.

To me it has always seemed that the doctrine of the Unknowable, in so
far as it differs from the doctrine of the Unknown, is highly
unphilosophical. By what right can it be affirmed that Deity, if He
exists, may not reveal the fact of His existence to-morrow--and this to
the whole human race without the possibility of doubt? Or, if there be a
God, who is to say that there certainly cannot be a future life, in
which each individual man may have unquestionable proof of Theism? It is
a perfectly philosophical statement for any one to make that, as matters
now stand, he can see no evidence of Theism; but to say that he knows
the human race never can have such evidence, is a most unphilosophical
statement, seeing that it could only be justified by absolute knowledge.
And, on this account, I say that the doctrine of the Unknowable, in so
far as it differs from the doctrine of the Unknown, is the very reverse
of agnostic.

Now, the theory of Monism alone, as observed in the text, appears to be
purely agnostic in the sense just explained. If in some parts of the
foregoing essay I appear to have been arguing in favour of theistic
implications, this has only been in order to show (as against Clifford)
that the world does admit of being regarded as an eject. But inasmuch
as--religious faith apart--we are not able to verify any such ejective
interpretation, we are not able to estimate its value. Monism sanctions
the shading of _x_ as deeply as we choose; but the shading which it
sanctions is only provisional.]




CHAPTER V.

THE WILL IN RELATION TO MATERIALISM AND SPIRITUALISM.


In the foregoing chapters I have considered the theory of Monism, first
in contrast with the theories of Materialism and of Spiritualism, and
next in relation to the theory of Theism. In this chapter and that which
succeeds it I propose to consider Monism in relation to the Will. To do
this it is needful to begin by considering the problems which are
presented by the Will in relation to the older theories of Materialism
on the one hand and of Spiritualism on the other.

Although the phenomena of volition have occupied so large a province of
philosophical literature, the fundamental problems which arise in
connexion with them are only two in number, and both admit of being
stated in extremely simple terms. The historical order in which these
two problems have arisen is the inverse of their logical order. For
while in logical order the two problems would stand thus--Is the Will an
agent? If so, is it a free agent?--in actual discussion it was long
taken for granted that the Will is an agent, and hence the only
controversy gathered round the question whether the Will is a free
agent. Descartes, indeed, seems to have entertained the prior question
with regard to animals, and there are passages in the _Leviathan_ which
may be taken to imply that Hobbes entertained this question with regard
to man. But it was not until recent years that any such question could
stand upon a basis of science as distinguished from speculation; the
question did not admit of being so much as stated in terms of science
until physiology was in a position openly to challenge our right to
assume that the Will is an agent. Such a challenge physiology has now
given, and even declared that any assumption of volitional agency is, in
the presence of adequate physiological knowledge, impossible.

The two problems which I thus state separately are often, and indeed
generally, confused together; but for the purpose of clear analysis it
is of the first importance that they should be kept apart. In order to
show the wide distinction between them, we may best begin with a brief
consideration of what it is that the two problems severally involve; and
to do this we may best take the problems in what I have called their
logical order.

First, then, as regards the question whether the Will is an agent, the
rival theories of Materialism and Spiritualism stand to one another in a
relation of contradiction. For it is of the essence of Spiritualism to
regard the Will as an agent, or as an original cause of bodily movement,
and therefore as a true cause in Nature. On the other hand, it is of the
essence of Materialism to deny that the Will is an agent. Hitherto,
indeed, materialists as a body have not expressly recognized this
implication as necessarily belonging to their theory; but that this
implication does necessarily belong to their theory--or rather, I should
say, really constitutes its most distinctive feature--admits of being
easily shown. For the theory that material changes are the causes of
mental changes necessarily terminates in the so-called theory of
conscious automatism--or the theory that so far as the conditions to
bodily action are concerned, consciousness is adventitious, bearing the
same ineffectual relation to the activity of the brain as the striking
of a clock bears to the time-keeping adjustments of the clock-work. From
this conclusion there is no possibility of escape, if once we accept the
premises of Materialism; and therefore I say it belongs to the essence
of Materialism to deny the agency of Will.

Just as necessarily does it belong to the essence of Monism to affirm
the agency of Will. For, according to this theory, while motion is
producing nothing but motion, mind-change nothing but mind-change, both
are producing both simultaneously; neither could be what it is without
the other, for each is to the other a necessary counterpart or
supplement, in the absence of which the whole causation (whether
regarded from the physical or mental side) would not be complete.

Now, in my opinion the importance of the view thus presented by the
theory of Monism is, for all purposes of psychological analysis,
inestimable. It is impossible nowadays that such analysis can proceed
very far in any direction without confronting the facts presented by
physiology: hence it is impossible for such analysis to confine itself
exclusively to the spiritual or subjective side of psychology. On the
other hand, in so far as such analysis has regard to the material or
objective side, it has hitherto appeared to countenance--in however
disguised a form--the dogmatic denial of the Will as an agent. Hence the
supreme importance to psychology of reconciling the hitherto rival
theories of Spiritualism and Materialism in the higher synthesis which
is furnished by the theory of Monism. For, obviously, in the absence of
any philosophical justification of the Will as an agent, we are without
any guarantee that all psychological inquiry is not a vain beating of
the air. If, as Materialism necessarily implies, the Will is not a cause
in Nature, there would be no reason in Nature for the agency either of
feeling or of intelligence. Feeling and intelligence would, therefore,
stand as ciphers in the general constitution of things; and any inquiry
touching their internal system of causation could have no reference to
any scientific inquiry touching causation in general. I am aware that
this truth is habitually overlooked by psychologists; but it is none
the less a truth of fundamental importance to the whole superstructure
of this science. Or, in other words, unless psychologists will expressly
consent to rear their science on the basis provided by the philosophical
theory of Monism, there is nothing to save it from logical
disintegration; apart from this basis, the whole science is, so to
speak, built in the air, like an unsubstantial structure of clouds.
Psychologists, I repeat, habitually ignore this fact, and constantly
speak of feeling and intelligence as true causes of adjustive action;
but by so doing they merely beg from this contradictory theory of
Spiritualism a flat denial of the fundamental postulate on which they
elsewhere proceed--the postulate, namely, that mental changes are
determined by cerebral changes. Consider, for example, the following
passage from Mr. Spencer's _Principles of Psychology_ (§ 125), which
serves to show in brief compass the logical incoherency which in this
matter runs through his whole work:--

     'Those races of beings only can have survived in which, on the
     average, agreeable or desired feelings went along with activities
     conducive to the maintenance of life, while disagreeable and
     habitually-avoided feelings went along with activities directly or
     indirectly destructive of life; and there must ever have been,
     other things equal, the most numerous and long-continued survivals
     among races in which these adjustments of feelings to actions were
     the best, tending ever to bring about perfect adjustment.'

The argument here is that the 'adjustments of feelings to actions,' when
once attained, leads in turn to an adjustment of actions to
feelings--or, as I have myself stated the argument in my _Mental
Evolution in Animals_, 'the _raison d'étre_ of Pleasure and Pain has
been that of furnishing organisms with guides to adjustive action:
moreover, as in the case of direct sensation dictating any simple
adjustment for the sake of securing an immediate good, so in the case of
instinct dictating a more intricate action for the sake of eventually
securing a more remote good (whether for self, progeny, or community);
and so, likewise, in the case of reason dictating a still more intricate
adjustment for the sake of securing a good still more remote--in all
cases, that is, where volition is concerned, pleasures and pains are the
guides of action.' But thus to affirm that pleasures and pains are the
guides of action is merely another way of affirming that the Will is an
agent--a cause of bodily movement, and, as such, a cause in Nature. Now,
as we have seen, Mr. Spencer not only affirms this--or rather assumes
it--but proceeds to render an _a priori_ explanation of the accuracy of
the guidance. Yet he nowhere considers the fundamental question--Why
should we suppose that the Will is an agent at all? Assuredly the answer
given by physiology to this question is a simple denial that we have any
justification so to regard the Will: in view of her demonstration of
conscious automatism, she can see no reason why there should be any
connexion at all between a subjective feeling of pleasure or pain
and an objective fact of 'agreement or disagreement with the
environment'--nay, one of the most eminent of her priesthood has
declared that there _is_ no more connexion between the ambition of a
Napoleon and a general commotion of Europe, than there is between the
puff of a steam-whistle and the locomotion of a train. And, as I have
now repeatedly insisted, on grounds of physiology alone this is the only
logical conclusion at which it is possible to arrive. Yet Mr. Spencer,
while elsewhere proceeding on the lines of physiology, whenever he
encounters the question of the agency of Will, habitually jumps the
whole gulf that separates Materialism from Spiritualism. And this
wonderful feat of intellectual athletics is likewise performed, so far
at least as I am aware, by every other psychologist who has proceeded on
the lines of physiology. Indeed, the logical incoherency is not so
serious in Mr. Spencer's case as it is in that of many other writers
whom I need not wait to name. For Mr. Spencer does not seek to found his
system on a basis of avowed Materialism, and, therefore, he may be said
to have left this fundamental question of volitional agency in abeyance.
But all those writers who have reared their systems of psychology on a
basis of avowed Materialism--or, which is the same thing, on a basis of
physiology alone--lay themselves open to the charge of grossest
inconsistency when they thus assume that the Will is an agent. It is
impossible that these writers can both have their cake and eat it.
Either they must forego their Materialism, or else they must cease to
speak of 'motives determining action,' 'conduct being governed by
pleasures and pains,' 'voluntary movements in their last resort being
all due to bodily feelings,' 'the highest morality and the lowest vice
being alike the result of a pursuit of happiness,' &c. &c. And, so far
as I can see, it is only in the way above indicated, or on the theory of
Monism, that it is possible, without ignoring the facts of physiology on
the one hand or those of psychology on the other, philosophically to
save the agency of Will.

From this brief exposition it may be gathered that on the materialistic
theory it is impossible that the Will can be, in any sense of the term,
an agent; that on the spiritualistic theory the Will is regarded as an
agent, but only in the sense of a non-natural or miraculous cause; and,
lastly, that on the monistic theory the Will is saved as an agent, or
may be properly regarded and as properly denominated a true cause, in
the ordinary sense of that term. For this, as well as for other reasons
which need not here be specified, I accept in philosophy the theory of
Monism; and am thus entitled in psychology to proceed upon the doctrine
that the Will is an agent. We have next to consider the ulterior
question whether upon this theory the Will may be properly regarded as a
free agent.

By a free agent is understood an agent that is able to act without
restraint, or spontaneously. The word 'free,' therefore, bears a very
different meaning when applied exclusively to the Will, and when
applied more generally to the living organism. For we may properly say
that a man, or an animal, is free when he, or it, is at liberty to act
in accordance with desire. Touching the fact of freedom in this sense
there is, of course, no question. We have not to consider the possible
freedom of man, but the possible freedom of Will; we have not to
contemplate whether a man may be free to do what he wills, but whether
he can be free to will what he wills. Such being the question, we have
to consider it in relation to the three philosophical theories already
stated--Materialism, Spiritualism, and Monism.

For the theory of Materialism the present question has no existence. If
this announcement appears startling, it can only be because no
materialist has ever taken the trouble to formulate his own theory with
distinctness. For, as previously shown, Materialism necessarily involves
the doctrine of conscious automatism; but, if so, the Will is concluded
not to be an agent at all, and therefore it becomes idle to discuss
whether, in any impossible exercise of its agency, it is free or subject
to restraint. The most that in this connexion could logically stand to
be considered by the advocates of Materialism would be whether or not
the adventitious and inefficacious feelings of subjectivity which are
associated with cerebral activity are determinate or free; but this
would probably be regarded on all hands as a somewhat useless topic of
discussion, and certainly in any case would have no reference to the
question of free _agency_. The point to be clearly understood is that,
according to the materialistic theory, a motor is distinct from a
motive, although in some unaccountable manner the motor is able to cause
the motive. But the motive, when thus caused, is not supposed to exert
any causal influence on bodily action; it is supposed to begin and end
as a motive, or never itself to become a motor. In other words, as
before stated, the Will is not supposed to be an agent; and, therefore,
to this theory the doctrine of free-will and of determinism are alike
irrelevant. We need not wait to prove that this important fact is
habitually overlooked by materialists themselves, or that whenever a
materialist espouses the cause of determinism, he is thereby and for the
time being vacating his position as a materialist; for if, according to
his theory, the Will is not an agent, he is merely impugning his own
doctrines by consenting to discuss the conditions of its agency.

The theory of Spiritualism and the theory of Monism agree in holding
that the Will is an agent; and, therefore, to both of these theories the
question whether the Will is a free agent is a real question. Here,
then, it devolves upon us to consider carefully the logical status of
the rival doctrines of so-called Liberty and Necessity. For convenience
of arrangement in what follows, we may best begin with the doctrine of
Necessity, or Determinism.




CHAPTER VI.

THE WILL IN RELATION TO MONISM.


We have now seen that, according to Materialism, the Will is not an
agent, while according both to Spiritualism and to Monism the Will is an
agent. Touching the further question, whether the Will is a free agent,
we have seen that while the question does not exist for Materialism, it
appears to require a negative answer both from Spiritualism and from
Monism. For, as regards its relation to Spiritualism, when once the
ground is cleared of certain errors of statement and fallacies of
reasoning, we appear to find that unless the will is held to be
motiveless--which would be to destroy not only the doctrine of moral
responsibility, but likewise that of universal causation--it must be
regarded as subject to law, or as determined in its action by the nature
of its past history and present circumstances. Lastly, the theory of
Monism appears likewise to deny the possibility of freedom as an
attribute of Will; for, according to this theory, mental processes are
one and the same with physical processes, and hence it does not appear
that the doctrine of determinism could well be taught in a manner more
emphatic.

Thus far, then, the doctrine of determinism is seen to be victorious
over the doctrine of freedom all along the line. By Materialism the
question of freedom is excluded _ab initio_; by Spiritualism and by
Monism, so far as yet seen, it can be logically answered only in the
negative. From which it follows that the sense of moral responsibility
is of the nature of a vast illusion, the historical genesis of which
admits of being easily traced, and the authority of which is thus
destroyed. Although it may still serve to supply motives to conduct, it
seems that it can do so only in the way that belongs to
superstition--that Conscience, as I have before said, is the bogey of
mankind, and that belief in its authority is like belief in witchcraft,
destined to dwindle and to fade before the advance of a better or more
complete knowledge of natural causation.

But the discussion must not end here. Hitherto I have presented the case
Liberty _versus_ Necessity with all the impartiality of which I am
capable; but I have done so without travelling an inch beyond those
limits of discussion within which the question has been debated by
previous writers. I believe, indeed, that I have pointed out several
important oversights which have been made on both sides of the question;
but in doing this I have not gone further than the philosophical basis
upon which the question has been hitherto argued. My object, however,
in publishing these papers is not that of destructive criticism; and
what I have done in this direction has been done only in order to
prepare the way for what is now to follow. Having shown, as it appears
to me conclusively, that upon both the rival theories of Materialism and
Spiritualism--the doctrine of Liberty, and therefore of Moral
Responsibility--must logically fall, I now hope to show that this
doctrine admits of being re-established on a basis furnished by the
theory of Monism.

It often happens that an elaborate structure of argument, which is
perfectly sound and complete upon the basis furnished by a given
hypothesis, admits of being wholly disintegrated when the fundamental
hypothesis is shown to be either provisional or untrue. And such, I
believe, is the case with the issue now before us. For the issue Liberty
_versus_ Necessity has hitherto been argued on the common assumption
that natural causation is not merely the most ultimate principle which
the human mind can reach; but also a principle which is, in some way or
another, external to that mind. It has been taken for granted by both
sides in the controversy that if our volitions can be proved to depend
upon natural causation, as rigid in its sequences within the sphere of a
human mind as within that of a calculating machine, there must be an end
of the controversy; seeing that our volitions would be thus proved to be
rigidly determined by those same principles of fixed order, or 'natural
law,' which are external to, or independent of, the human mind--quite as
much as they are external to, or independent of, the calculating
machine. Now, it is this assumption which I challenge. The theory of
Monism entitles one to deny that when we have driven the question down
to the granite bed of natural causation, nothing more remains to be
done; according to this theory it still remains to be asked, What is the
nature of this natural causation? Is it indeed the ultimate datum of
experience, below which the human mind cannot go? And is it indeed so
far external to, or independent of, the human mind, that the latter
stands to it in the relation of a slave to a master--coerced as to
action by the conditions which that master has laid down?

Now these questions are all virtually answered in the affirmative by the
dualistic theory of Spiritualism. For the Will is here regarded as an
agent bound to act in accordance with those conditions of external
necessity which dualism recognizes as natural causation. Its internal
causation thus becomes but the reflex of external; and the reflection
becomes known internally as the consciousness of motive. Hence, the Will
cannot be philosophically liberated from the toils of this external
necessity, so long as dualism recognizes that necessity as existing
independently of the Will, and thus imposing its conditions on
volitional activity. But the theory of Monism, by identifying external
with internal causation--or physical processes with psychical
processes--philosophically saves the doctrine of freedom, and with it
the doctrine of moral responsibility. Moreover, it does so without
relying upon any precarious appeal to the direct testimony of
consciousness itself. As this view of the subject is one by no means
easy of apprehension, I will endeavour to unfold it part by part.

To begin with, Monism excludes the possibility of volition being
determined by cerebration. Let us suppose, for example, that a sequence
of ideas, _A, B, C, D_, occurs in the mind, which on its obverse or
cerebral aspect may be represented by the sequence _a, b, c, d_. Here
the parallelism is not due, as supposed by Materialism, to _a_
determining _Ab_, _b_ determining _Bc_, &c.; it is due to _Aa_
determining _Bb_, _Bb_ determining _Cc_, &c.--the two apparently diverse
causal sequences being really but one causal sequence. If the
determinist should rejoin that a causal sequence of some kind is all
that he demands--that the Will is equally proved to be unfree, whether
it be bound by the causal sequence _a, b, c, d_, or by the causal
sequence _Aa, Bb, Cc, Dd_--I answer that this is a point which we have
to consider by-and-by. Meanwhile I am only endeavouring to make clear
the essential distinction between the philosophical theories of Monism
and Materialism. And the effect of this distinction is to show that, for
the purposes of clear analysis, we may wholly neglect either side of the
double reality. If we happen to be engaged on any physiological
inquiry, we may altogether neglect the processes of ideation with which
any process of cerebration may be concerned; while, if we happen to be
engaged upon any psychological inquiry, we may similarly neglect the
processes of cerebration with which any process of ideation may be
concerned. Seeing that each is equally an index of a common sequence, it
can make no difference which of them we take as our guide, although for
purposes of practical inquiry it is of course expedient to take the
cerebral index when we are dealing with the objective side of the
problem, and the mental index when dealing with the subjective. In the
following pages, therefore, I shall altogether neglect the cerebral
index. The inquiry on which we are engaged belongs to the region of
mind, and, therefore, after what has just been said, it will be apparent
that I am entitled to adopt the standpoint of a spiritualist, to the
extent of fastening attention only upon the mental side of the problem.
For although the theory of Monism teaches, as against Spiritualism, that
no one of the mental sequences could take place without a corresponding
physical sequence, the theory also teaches the converse proposition; and
therefore it makes no difference which of the two phenomenal sequences
is taken as our index of the ontological.

Now, it clearly makes a great difference whether the mental changes
concerned in volition are regarded as effects or as causes. According
to Materialism, the mental changes are the effects of cerebral changes,
which were themselves the effects of precedent cerebral changes.
According to Spiritualism, these mental changes are the causes, not only
of the cerebral changes, but also of one another. According to Monism,
the mental changes may be regarded as the causes of the cerebral, or
_vice versa_, seeing that in neither case are we stating a real
truth--the real truth being that it is only a cerebro-mental change
which can cause any change either of cerebration or of mentation. Now it
is evident that if the mental processes were always the effects of
cerebral processes (Materialism), there could be no further question
with regard to Liberty and Necessity; while, if the mental processes are
the causes both of the cerebral processes and of one another
(Spiritualism), the question before us becomes raised to a higher level.
The causality in question being now regarded as purely mental, the will
is no longer regarded as a passive slave of the brain, and the only
thing to be considered is whether freedom is compatible with causation
of a purely mental kind. Now, at an earlier stage of our enquiry I have
argued that it is not; but this argument was based entirely upon
spiritualistic premises, or upon the assumption that the principle of
causality is everywhere external to, or independent of, the human
mind--under which assumption I cannot see that it makes much difference
whether the coercion comes from the brain alone, or from the whole
general system of things external to the human mind. And here it is that
I think the theory of Monism comes to the rescue.

For, if physical and mental processes are everywhere consubstantial, or
identical in kind, it can make no difference whether we regard their
sequences as objective or ejective, physical or spiritual. Hence, we are
free to regard all causation as of a character essentially psychical.
But, if so, it must be self-contained as psychical; it cannot be in any
way determined by anything from without, seeing that outside itself
there is nothing in the Universe. Now, if this is true of the
World-eject, it must also be true of the Man-eject, as well as of the
Man-subject, or Ego. If all causation is psychical, that portion of it
which belongs to, or is manifested by, my own personality is not laid
upon me by anything from without; it is merely the expression of my own
psychical activity, as this is taking place within the circumscribed
area of my own personality. And this activity is spontaneous, in the
sense that it is not coerced from without. All the sequences which that
activity displays within this region are self-determined, in the sense
that they are determined by the self, and not by any agency external to
it. The only influence which any external agency can here exert, is that
of insisting that bodily action--the physical outcome of my psychical
processes--shall be in accordance with the conditions imposed by the
internal system of causation; but this does not influence in any degree
those mental processes which do not express themselves in bodily action.
Hence, it may be perfectly true that my bodily action in the past might
have been different from what it actually was; for as this action was
the outcome of my mentation at the time (according to the spiritual
index, which is now our guide), and as this mentation was not coerced
from without, it might very well have been different from what it was.
Each of the mental sequences at that time was a result of those
preceding and a cause of those succeeding; but behind all this play of
mental causation there all the while stood that Self, which was at once
the condition of its occurrence, and the _First Cause_ of its action. It
is not true that that Self was nothing more than the result of all this
play of mental causation; it can only have been the First Cause of it.
For, otherwise, the mental causation must have been the cause of that
causation, which is absurd. Who or What it was that originally caused
this First Cause is, of course, another question, which I shall
presently hope to show is not merely unanswerable, but unmeaning. As a
matter of fact, however, we know that this Self is here, and that it can
thus be proved to be a substance, _standing under_ the whole of that
more superficial display of mental causation which it is able to look
upon introspectively--and this almost as _impersonally_ as if it were
regarding the display as narrated by another mind. I say, then, that
the theory of Monism entitles us to regard this Self as the _fons et
origo_ of our mental causation, and thus restores to us the doctrine of
Liberty with its attendant consequence of Moral Responsibility.

It may help to elucidate this matter if we regard it from another point
of view. According to Hobbes, 'Liberty is the absence of all impediments
to action that are not contained in the nature and intrinsical qualities
of the agent.' Now, if we accept this definition, it is easy to show
that the theory of Monism is really at one with the doctrine of Liberty.
For, in the first place, according to the theory of Monism, the neurosis
of the brain could not be what it is without the psychosis of the mind.
Consequently, as above shown, it would be equally incorrect to say that
the neurosis governs the psychosis, as it would be to say that the
psychosis governs the neurosis. But, if so, the Will is free in
accordance with Hobbes' definition of freedom. Suppose, for example,
that on seeing a bone I think of Professor Flower, then remember that a
long time ago I lent his book on Osteology to a friend, and forthwith
resolve to ask my friend what has become of it; here my ultimate
volition would be unfree if it were the effect of physical processes
going on in my brain. But the volition might be free if each of these
mental processes were the result of the preceding one, seeing that there
may then have been 'an absence of all impediments' to the occurrence of
these processes.

Of course it will be objected--as I have myself urged in the preceding
chapter--that causal action of any kind is incompatible with freedom of
volition--that if there be any such causal action, even though it be
wholly restricted within the sphere of mind, the Will is really
compelled to will as it does will, is determined to determine as it does
determine, and hence that its apparent freedom is illusory. Hobbes'
definition, it may be urged, when applied to the case of the Will, is
equivocal. No doubt a man is free as to his _action_, if there be an
'absence of all impediments' to his action--or, in other words, if he is
able to act as he wills to act. But it does not follow that he is free
as to his _will_, even though there be an absence of all impediments to
his willing as he wills to will. For here the very question is as to
whether there are any impediments to his willing otherwise than he does
will. The fact that he wills to will as he does will proves that there
are no impediments to his willing in that direction; but is there a
similar absence of impediments to his willing to will in any other
direction? If so, we are still within the lines of determinism. Thus
Hobbes' definition of freedom really applies only to freedom of bodily
action; not to freedom of volition, seeing that if my will is caused I
could not have willed to will otherwise than I did will. Now, the answer
which Monism supplies to this objection is that the will itself is here
the ultimate agent, and _therefore an agent which must be identified
with the principle of causality_. In other words, the very reason why we
feel that Hobbes' definition of liberty, while perfectly valid as
regards bodily action, seems to lack something when applied to volition,
is because volition belongs to the sphere of mind--belongs, therefore,
to that sphere which the theory of Monism regards as identical with
causality itself. Although it is true that volitions are caused by
motives, yet it is the mind which conditions the motives, and therefore
its own volitions. It is not true that the mind is always the passive
slave of causes, known to it as motives. The human mind is itself a
causal agent, having the same kind of priority within the microcosm as
the World-eject has in the macrocosm. Therefore its motives are in large
part matters of its own creation. In the intricate workings of its own
internal machinery innumerable patterns of thought are turned out, some
of which it selects as good, while others it rejects as bad; but no one
of which could have come into being at all without this causal agency of
the mind itself.

It will probably be objected that even though all this were granted, we
cannot thus save the doctrine of moral responsibility. For it may appear
that the liberty which is thus accorded to the Will is nothing better
than liberty to will at random, as argued in my previous essay. But here
we must observe that although we are thus shown free to will at random,
it does not follow that we are likewise free to act in accordance with
our volitions. And this is a most important distinction, which
libertarians have hitherto failed to notice. If we are free to will in
any direction, it follows, indeed, that we are free to will at random;
but it follows also, and for this very reason, that we are free to will
the _impossible_. True, when we will what is known to be impossible of
execution, we call the act an act of desire; but it is clearly the same
in kind as an act of will, and differs only in not admitting of being
translated into an act of body. Therefore I say that the restriction
which is imposed upon us by the conditions of causality, whether
external or internal, is not any restriction as to willing, but merely
as to doing. It is not in the subjective, but in the objective world
that we encounter the 'bondage of necessity.'

Now, the knowledge that we are thus restricted as to bodily action
imposes that kind of restraint upon volition which is termed rational.
There is nothing in the nature of things to prevent our willing anything
that we wish; but there is something in the nature of things to prevent
our doing everything that we will; and as the practical object of our
volition is that of determining bodily action, we find it expedient to
will only such things as we believe that we can do. To this extent,
therefore, the Will is bound--namely, by the executive capacity of the
body. But, strictly speaking, this is not a binding of the Will _qua_
Will. Even in such cases, as St. Paul says, to will may be present with
us, but how to perform that which is good we find not. I say then that
although the Will is free to will whatever it wills, nevertheless it
would fail in its essential use or object did it refuse to will in
accordance with the conditions which are imposed upon its executive
capacity. Again, to quote St. Paul, the Will might say, All things for
me are lawful; but all things are not expedient. Now, this consideration
of expediency is one of constant and far-reaching importance. For not
only, as already observed, does it lead to volition on the one hand as
rational; but it also leads to volition on the other hand as moral. Let
us take the two points separately.

Do we say that a man is not free to conduct a scientific research,
because in conducting it he must employ the needful apparatus? Or do we
say that a man is not free to marry, because in order to do so he must
go through a marriage ceremony? Obviously, to say such things would
sound very like talking nonsense. It is true that in neither case is a
man free to gain his object without adopting the means which are seen to
be necessary under the system of external causation in which he finds
himself; but this does not mean that he is not free to do as he wills,
unless it so happens that he wills to do the impossible. Thus, within
the limits that are set by the conditions of causation, a man is
understood to be free to act as he wills so long as he is not 'impeded'
by some of those conditions. To say that he is not free because he
cannot get beyond those conditions would be absurd, since, apart from
these conditions, action of any kind would be _a priori_ impossible,
and the man would have, as his only alternative, no-action.

Hence, in doing we must conform to the law of causation--which, indeed,
is all that can be meant by doing--and if in willing what we do we must
also conform to the law of causation, where is the difference with
respect to freedom? Such restraint as there may be is here a restraint
upon bodily action; not at all upon the mental action which we call
volition. The Will may will in any way that it wills to will; but the
body cannot act in every way that the Will may will it to act; therefore
the Will finds it expedient to will only in such ways as the body can
act--i. e. to conform in _its_ action to the external system of
causation. If this condition of all action is held to be compatible with
freedom in the one case, so in consistency must it be held in the other.
Equally in either case the agent can only be properly said to be unfree,
if he be subject to causal restraint from without. And in neither case
does the universal condition of acting under the law of causation
constitute bondage, in any other sense than that of furnishing the agent
with his conditions to acting in any way at all. Therefore, unless it be
said that a man is not free to do as he wills because he wills to do the
impossible, it cannot be denied that he is free to will as he wills
because he wills according to law. For no action of any kind is possible
contrary to law--a general fact which goes to constitute an argument _a
posteriori_ for the rationality of the World-eject--and if volition
constituted an exception to this general statement, it could only do so
by becoming no-action. Now, it is by thus willing according to law--or
with due reference to those external conditions of causality with which
the executive capacity has to do--that volition is rendered rational.
The restraint laid upon volition is not laid upon it _as_ volition, but
only in respect of execution. A man may will to marry as long and as
hard as he chooses; but only if he further wills to take the necessary
means can his volition become rational; it is irrational if he wills to
marry, and at the same time wills not to go through the marriage
ceremony. But although irrational, it is none the less free. Considered
merely as an act of volition it is equally free, whether it be rational
or irrational.

And, similarly, it is equally free whether it be moral or immoral. The
objection that an uncaused volition cannot be a responsible volition
depends for its validity on the meaning which we attach to the term
'uncaused.' If it be meant that the volition arises without any regard
at all to the surrounding conditions of life, and is carried into effect
without the agent being able to control it by means of any other
voluntary act; then, indeed, whatever else such an agent may be, he
certainly is not moral. But if it be meant that among a number of
uncompleted volitions drawing in different directions--and all
'uncaused' in the sense of belonging immediately to the Ego--one of
them gains an advantage by a conscious reference of the mind to it as
good or evil, then the agent who is capable of giving this advantage to
that member of the system may properly be called moral. The man who
willed to marry, and yet willed not to go through the marriage ceremony,
was, as we have seen, irrational. Similarly, if any agent wills an
action without being able to consider any of the consequences which it
may involve as either moral or immoral, such an agent is what we must
properly call unmoral. Even in such an agent, however, the Will may be
free; only it would act without reference to any moral environment, just
as the lunatic above supposed might endeavour to act without reference
to any social environment.

Let us look at the whole matter in yet another light. We have repeatedly
seen that the question of free-will, and therefore of moral
responsibility, depends upon the question as to whether a man's action
in the past might have been other than it was, notwithstanding that all
the conditions under which he was placed remained the same. Now, to this
question only one answer can be given by a dualistic theory of things,
whether materialistic or spiritualistic. For it belongs to the essence
of a dualistic theory to regard the principle of causation as a
principle external to, and independent of, the human mind; consequently,
all the conditions of mental causation being given, a certain result in
the way of volition is necessarily bound to ensue--or, in other words,
at any given time in a man's mental history, his action cannot have
been other than it was. But now, according to the monistic theory, all
causation has a psychical basis--being but the objective expression to
us of the psychical activity of the World-eject. Consequently, according
to this theory, the course of even strictly physical causation is
inevitable or necessary only in so far as the psychical activity of the
World-eject is held to be uniform, or consistent within itself. And
forasmuch as all our knowledge of physical causation is necessarily
empirical, we have but very inadequate means of judging how far this
empirical index is a true gauge of the reality. We can, indeed, predict
an eclipse centuries in advance; but we can only do so on the
supposition that such and such physical conditions remain constant, and
we have no right to affirm that such must be the case. Our knowledge of
physical causation, being but empirical, is probably but a very
inadequate translation of the psychical activity of the World-eject; and
hence, not only have we no right to predict a future eclipse with
certainty, but we have not so much as the right to affirm that even a
past eclipse must have taken place of necessity. For we have no right to
affirm that at any one period of cosmic history the action of the
World-eject must have been what it was, or could not have been other
than it was. Our knowledge of the obverse aspect of this action (in the
course of physical causation) is, as I have said, purely empirical; and
this is merely another way of saying that although we do know what the
action of the World-eject has been at such and such a period of cosmic
history, we can have no means of knowing what else it might have been.
For anything that we can tell to the contrary, the whole history of the
solar system, for example, might have been quite different from what it
has been; the course which it actually has run may have been but one out
of an innumerable number of possible alternatives, any other of which
might just as well have been adopted by the World-eject.

Now, if this is true of natural causation in the case of the macrocosm,
it would appear to be equally so of natural causation in the case of the
microcosm. Indeed, prediction in the case of human activity is so much
less certain than in the case of cosmic activity, that the attribute of
free-will is generally ascribed to the former, while rarely suggested as
possibly belonging to the latter. And similarly as regards past action.
If we are unable to say that at any period in the past history of the
solar system the World-eject might not have deflected the whole stream
of events into some other channel, how can we be able to say that at any
given period of his past history the Man-eject could not have performed
an analogous act? Obviously, the only reason why we are not accustomed
to entertain this supposition in either case, is because our judgements
are beset with the assumption that the principle of causality is prior
to that of mind--something of the nature of Fate superior even to the
gods. And, no less obviously, if once we see any reason to regard the
principle of causality as merely co-extensive with that of mind, the
whole question as between Necessity and Free-will lapses; there is
nothing to show that a man's action in the past might not have been
other than it was. The only outward restraint placed upon the exercise
of his Will is then seen to be imposed by the conditions of its
executive capacity, and this restraint it is that constitutes man a
rational agent. On the other hand, the structure of conscience--however
we may suppose this to have been formed--imposes that further and inward
restraint upon his Will, which constitutes man a moral agent. But
neither of these restraints can properly be said to constitute bondage
in the sense required by Necessitarianism, because neither of them
requires that the man's Will must will as it does will; they require
merely that his Will should act in certain ways if it is to accomplish
certain results; and to this extent only is it subject to law, or to the
incidence of those external influences which help to shape our motives.

But if this is so, is it not obvious that the sense of moral
responsibility is rationally justified? This sense goes upon the
supposition that a man's conduct in the past might have been different
from what it was. Clearly, therefore, no question of moral
responsibility can ever obtain in cases where the general system of
external causation, or natural law, rendered an alternative line of
action physically impossible. _The question of moral responsibility can
only obtain in cases where two or more lines of conduct were alike
possible, so far as the external system of causation is concerned--or
where the Will was equally free to choose between two or more courses of
bodily action._ In other words, the question of moral responsibility has
nothing to do with the only kind of bondage to which, according to our
present point of view, the Will is subject--namely the bondage of being
rationally obliged to will only what is capable of performance. The
question of moral responsibility has only to do with the system of
causation which is inherent in the mind itself; not with the system that
is external to the mind. And as the theory of Monism identifies the mind
with this its own inherent system of causation--or regards a man's Will
as the originator of a particular portion of general causality--it
follows from the theory that a man is justly liable to moral praise or
blame as the case may be: the moral sense no longer appears as a
gigantic illusion: conscience is justified at the bar of reason.

It appears to me impossible that any valid exception can be taken to the
above reasoning, if once the premiss is granted--namely, that the
principle of Causality admits of being regarded as identical with that
of Volition. For if Cause is but another name for Will--whether the Will
be subjective or ejective--it follows that my will is a first cause,
which is determined by other causes only in so far as the executive
capacity of my body is so determined. As the whole stress of any
objection to the present argument must thus be brought to bear upon the
validity of this its fundamental premiss, a few words may now be said to
show that the premiss is not wholly gratuitous. Of course the reason why
at first sight it is apt to appear, not only gratuitous, but even
grotesque, is because in these days of physical science the minds of
most of us are dominated by the unthinking persuasion that the principle
of causality is the most ultimate principle which our minds can reach.
Most of us accept this persuasion as almost of the nature of an axiom,
and hence the mere suggestion that our own volitions are really uncaused
appears to us of the nature of a self-evident absurdity. A little
thought, however, is enough to show that the only ground of reason which
this strong prepossession can rest upon, is the assumption that the
principle of causality is logically prior to that of mind. Therefore it
is the validity of this assumption that we have here to investigate.

In the first place, then, the assumption is _ipso facto_ irrational. For
it is evident that in order to make the assumption there must already be
a mind to make it. In other words, the very conception of the principle
of causality implies a thinking substance wherein that conception
arises, and therefore, as a mere matter of formal statement, it is
impossible to assign logical priority to this conception over the thing
whereby it is conceived.

In the next place, when we carefully analyze the nature of this
conception itself, we find that it arises immediately out of our
conception of Being as Being. This is shown by the idea of _equivalency_
between cause and effect, which is an essential feature of the
conception of causality as such. In other words, the statement of any
causal relation is merely a statement of the fact that both the matter
and the energy concerned in the event were of a permanent nature and
unalterable amount. Therefore, _if_ the ultimate Reality is mental,
Causation _must_ be ontologically identical with Volition. And that the
ultimate Reality is either mental, or something greater, seems to be
proved by the consideration that if it be supposed anything _less_,
there must be an end of the conception of equivalency as between cause
and effect, and so of the conception of causality itself; for, clearly,
if my mind has been caused by anything less than itself, there is an end
of any possible equivalency between the activity of that thing as a
cause, and the occurrence of my mind as an effect[13].

Lastly, the conception of causality essentially involves the idea of
finality as existing somewhere. Here I cannot do better than quote some
extracts from Canon Mozley's essay on 'The Principle of Causation,' as
he manages very tersely to convey the gist of previous philosophizing
upon this subject.

     'He (Clarke) brings out simply at bottom the meaning and
     significance of an idea in the human mind, that there is implied in
     the very idea itself of cause, firstly, that it causes something
     else; and secondly, that it is uncaused itself.... An infinite
     series of causes does not make a cause; ... an infinite succession
     of causes rests, by the very hypothesis, upon no cause; each
     particular one rests on the one which follows it, but the whole
     rests upon nothing.... If from one cause we have to go back to
     another, that which we go back from is not the cause, but that
     which we go back to is. The very idea of cause, as I have said,
     implies a stop; and wherever we stop is the cause.... A true cause
     is a First Cause.... The atheistic idea thus does not correspond to
     the idea of reason. The atheist appears to acknowledge the
     necessity of a cause, and appears to provide for it; but when we
     come to his scheme it fails exactly in that part of the idea which
     clenches it, and which is essential to its integrity; it fails in
     providing a stop; ... One might say to him, Why do you give
     yourself the trouble to supply causation at all? You do so because
     you consider yourself obliged in reason to do it, but if you supply
     causation at all, why not furnish such a cause as reason has
     impressed upon you, and which is inherent in your mind--a cause
     which stands still, an original cause? If you never intended to
     supply this, it must have been because you thought a real cause was
     not wanted; but if you thought a cause not wanted, why not have
     said from the first that causes were not wanted, and said from the
     first that events could take place without causes?'

Or, to quote a more recent authority, and one speaking from the side of
physical science, Prof. Huxley writes:--

     'The student of nature who starts from the axiom of the
     universality of the law of causation, cannot refuse to admit an
     eternal existence; if he admits the conservation of energy, he
     cannot deny the possibility of an eternal energy; if he admits the
     existence of immaterial phenomena in the form of consciousness, he
     must admit the possibility, at any rate, of an eternal series of
     such phenomena; and, if his studies have not been barren of the
     best fruit of the investigation of nature, he will have enough
     sense to see that, when Spinoza says, "Per Deum intelligo ens
     absolute infinitum, hoc est substantiam constantem infinitis
     attributis," the God so conceived is one that only a very great
     fool would deny, even in his heart. Physical science is as little
     Atheistic as it is Materialistic[14].'

Now, if it thus belongs to the essence of our idea of causation that
finality must be reached somewhere, I do not know where this is so
likely to be reached as at that principle wherein the idea itself takes
its rise--viz. Mind. But, if so, the statement that any particular acts
of mind are uncaused ceases to present any character of self-evident
absurdity.

And the argument need not end here. For Mr. Herbert Spencer has shown
that our idea of causation, not merely requires a mind for its
occurrence, but that in every mind where it does occur it has been
directly formed out of experiences of effort in acts of volition. So
that whether we analyze the idea of cause as we actually discover it in
our own minds, or investigate the history of its genesis, we alike find,
as we might have antecedently expected, that it is dependent on our more
ultimate idea of mind as mind; the conception of causality is not, as a
matter of fact, original or primal, but derivative or secondary.
Therefore, if this conception necessarily involves the postulation of a
first cause, there can be no doubt that such a cause can only be
conceived as of the nature of mind. From which it follows that each
individual mind requires to be regarded--if it is regarded at all--as of
the nature of a first cause.

From this, however, it does not follow that each individual mind
requires to be regarded as wholly independent of all other causes, or as
never subject to any causal influence which may be exercised by other
minds. Although each mind presents the feature of finality or
spontaneity, this does not hinder that it also presents the feature of
relation to other minds, which, therefore, are able to act upon it in
numberless ways. Now, whether these minds are the minds of other men, of
other intelligent beings, or of the whole World-eject, the causal
activity which is exerted upon my mind expresses itself in that mind as
a consciousness of motives. But although these motives may help to
determine my volitions, there is no reason to suppose that they are
themselves the volitions, or that without them my mind would cease to be
itself a causal agent. On the contrary, if this were supposed, the
supposition would amount to destroying the causal agency of my own mind,
which, as we have just seen, must either be original or not at all.

The way, therefore, that the matter stands is this. In so far as the
microcosm is a circumscribed system of being--a thinking substance, a
personality--it is of the nature of a first cause, free to act in any
direction as to its thinking and willing, even though its thinking
should be irrational as to truth, and its willing impossible as to
execution. But in so far as the microcosm enters into relation with the
macrocosm, the system of external causation which it encounters
determines the character of its volitions. For although these volitions
are themselves of the nature of first causes, it is no contradiction to
say that they are--at all events in large measure--determined by other
and external causes. This is no contradiction because, although they are
thus determined, it does not follow that they are thus determined
_necessarily_, and this makes all the difference between the theory of
will as bond or free. In any stream of secondary causation each member
of the series is understood to determine the next member of necessity;
and it is because this notion is imported into psychology that the
theory of determinism regards it as axiomatic that, if our volitions are
in any way caused at all, they can only be caused by way of necessity;
and hence that under the operation of any given set of motives the
action of the will can only take place in the direction of the
resultant. But any such axiom is valid only within the region of second
causes. On the hypothesis that volitions are first causes, the axiom is
irrelevant to them; for although it may be true that they are determined
by causes from without, it may not be true that they are thus determined
of necessity: their intrinsic character as themselves first causes,
although not isolating them from any possible contact with other causes,
nevertheless does protect them from being necessarily coerced by these
causes, and therefore from becoming but the mere effects of them. Such
influence, or determination, as is exerted upon the Will by these
external causes is exerted only because any individual mind is not
itself a macrocosm, but a microcosm in relation to a macrocosm. If it
were itself a macrocosm, standing out of relation to all other being,
its prime causation would, of course, be wholly uninfluenced by any
other causation; its volitions would then be concerned only with the
determination of its own thoughts in a constant stream of purely
subjective contemplation, such as that which the Hindoo philosophy
attributes to God. But as the human mind discovers itself as existing in
close and complex relations with an external world of an orderly
character, the human mind finds that it is, as before said, _expedient_
to adapt the course of its own causal activity so as to bring it into
harmony with the external order. For, although its own causal activity
is primal, it by no means follows that on this account it is almighty;
hence, even although it be primal, it is nevertheless under the
necessity of adopting means in order to secure its ends--or, in other
words, of adjusting its volitions (if they are to be practically
efficient) to the conditions which are imposed upon its activity by the
orderly system of the external world. Which is merely another way of
stating the conclusion previously reached--viz. that the only necessity
which can be proved to govern our volitions is the necessity which is
imposed by our own considerations of reason and morality. Although we
find that it is expedient to adapt our own causal activity to that
larger system of causal activity by which we are surrounded--seeing that
we must do so necessarily if we are to act at all--it by no means
follows that we are bound to will what is expedient. In other words, the
necessity laid upon us by the system of external causation is a
necessity to adopt means for the attainment of ends; not a necessity to
will the ends. And although in many cases this distinction may appear to
be practically unmeaning--seeing that no man wills what he knows to be
impossible of execution, and therefore that to say he is necessarily
prevented from doing a certain thing seems practically equivalent to
saying that he is necessarily prevented from willing that thing--in all
cases where any question of moral responsibility can possibly obtain,
the distinction is one of fundamental importance. For, as already shown,
any question of moral responsibility can only obtain where two or more
lines of action are alike possible, and therefore where no necessity is
laid upon the man in respect of carrying out his volitions, in whichever
direction they may eventually proceed. Although in any event he is
necessarily bound to adopt means in order to secure his ends, the moral
quality of his choice has reference only to the ends which he chooses;
not at all to the fact that he has to employ means for the purpose of
attaining them. And even though his choice be influenced by his physical
and social environment--as it must be if it be either rational on the
one hand or moral on the other--it does not follow that this influence
is of a kind to neutralize or destroy the causal nature of his own
volition. For the influence which is thus exerted cannot be exerted
necessarily, unless we suppose that the Will is not a first cause, which
is the possibility now under consideration. If the Will is a first
cause, the influences brought to bear upon it by its relation to other
causes--and in virtue of which it is constituted, not only a cause
primal, but also a cause rational and moral--these influences differ
_toto coelo_ from those which are exercised by any members in a series
of secondary causes upon the next succeeding causes. And the difference
consists in the absence of necessary or unconditional sequence in the
one case, and its presence in the other. However strong the determining
influence of a motive may be, if the Will is a first cause, the motive
must belong to a different order of causal relation from a motor; for,
no matter how strong the determining influence may be, _ex hypothesi_ it
can never attain to the strength of necessity; the Will must ever remain
free to overcome such influence by an adequate exercise of its own power
of spontaneous action, or of supplying _de novo_ an additional access of
strength to some other motive. Of course, as a general rule, the Will
allows itself to be influenced by motives supplied immediately by its
relations with the external world; but this is so only because the
thinking substance well knows that it is expedient so to fall in with
the general stream of external causation. Hence, as a general rule, it
is only in cases where the stream of external causation is drawing the
will in different directions that the causal activity of the Will itself
is called into play. Or rather, I should say, it is only in such cases
that we become conscious of the fact. In the case of every voluntary
movement the primal activity of Will must be concerned (and this even in
the case of the lower animals); but as the vast majority of such
movements are performed by way of response to frequently recurring
circumstances, the response which experience has shown to be most
expedient is given, as it were, automatically, or without the occurrence
of any adverse motive. But in cases where motives are drawing in
different directions, we become conscious of an effort of Will in
choosing one or other line of conduct, and, according to our present
hypothesis, this consciousness of effort is an expression of the work
which the Will is doing in the way of spontaneous causation.

Thus, upon the whole, if we identify the principle of causation with the
principle of mind--as we are bound to do by the theory of Monism--we
thereby draw a great and fundamental distinction between causation as
this occurs in the external world, and as it occurs within the limits of
our own subjectivity. And the distinction consists in the unconditional
nature of a causal sequence in the external world, as against the
conditional nature of it in the other case; the condition to the
effective operation of a motive--as distinguished from a motor--is the
acquiescence of the first cause upon which that motive is operating.

To the foregoing argument it may be objected that by expressly regarding
the human mind as a first cause of its own volitions, I imply that that
mind can itself have had no cause, which appears to be self-evidently
absurd. But here again the absurdity only arises from our inveterate
habit of regarding the principle of causation as logically prior to that
of mind. If we expressly refuse to do this, there is nothing absurd in
supposing the principle of mind wherever it occurs, as itself uncaused.
For if, as we are now supposing, this principle is identical with that
of causation, to say that any mind is caused would be to say that a
cause is the cause of itself, which would be really absurd. Under the
present point of view, therefore, it would be a meaningless question to
ask for the cause of a human mind, since, _ex hypothesi_, a human mind
is a part of the self-existing substance, although not on this account
self-existing as to its individual personality. As argued in a previous
chapter, the personality appears to arise on account of circumscription,
or the isolation of a constituent part of the World-eject. Therefore,
although it may be reasonable to ask for a cause of this
circumscription--or of the personality--it is not reasonable to ask for
a cause of the substance which is thus circumscribed, or of the quality
of spontaneity which that substance exhibits.

I will now state the whole case in another way. When we regard the facts
of volition from the stand-point of psychology, the only theory of them
which is open to us is, as we have before seen, that of determinism.
Moreover, within these limits that theory is perfectly true. Psychology,
as such, cannot recognize any principle more ultimate than natural
causation, seeing that, like any other of her sisters in the family of
sciences, her whole work and duty are confined to the investigation of
this principle. But, just as in the case of all the other sciences, when
her investigations have been pushed to the point where they encounter
the problem of explaining this principle itself, her investigations
must necessarily cease; this principle is for all the sciences the
ultimate datum, behind which they cannot go without ceasing to be
sciences. But it does not follow that because the area of science is
limited by that of causation, therefore we are precluded from asking any
questions as to the nature of this ultimate datum. Of course any
questions which we may thus ask cannot possibly be answered by science;
they are questions of philosophy, in the consideration of which science,
from her very nature and essential limitation of her office, can have no
voice. Now, if on taking up the principle of causation where this is
left by science--viz. as the ultimate or unanalyzable _datum_ of
experience, upon which all her investigations are founded, and by which
they are all limited--philosophy finds any reason to surmise that it is
resolvable into the principle of mind, philosophy is thus able to
suggest that any distinction between mental processes as determinate or
free, is really a meaningless distinction. For, according to this
suggestion, the issue is no longer as to whether these processes are
caused or uncaused; the very idea of cause has been abolished as one
which belongs only to that lower level of inquiry with which science, or
sensuous experience, is concerned. Here, no doubt, the question is a
thoroughly real one, and, as shown in previous chapters, can only be
answered in the way of determinism. But so soon as we ascend to the
philosophical theory of Monism, and so transcend the conditions of
sensuous experience, the question whether volitions are caused or
uncaused becomes, as I have said, a meaningless question, or a question
the terms of which are not correctly stated. If it be the case that all
causality is of a nature psychical, volition and causation are one and
the same thing, differing only in relation to our modes of apprehension.
It would therefore be equally meaningless to say that either is the
cause of the other--just as it would be equally meaningless to say that
neurosis is the cause of psychosis, or that psychosis is the cause of
neurosis. Or thus, if volition and causation are one and the same thing,
the only reason why they ever appear diverse is because the one is known
ontologically, while the other is known phenomenally. Were it possible
that the orbit of my own personality could be widened so as to include
within my own subjectivity the whole universe of causality, I should
find--according to Monism--that all causation would become transformed
into volition. Hence, the only reason why there now appears to be so
great an antithesis between these two principles, is because the
volition which is going on outside of my own consciousness can only be
known to me objectively,--or at most ejectively,--on which account the
principle of causality appears to me phenomenally as the most ultimate,
or most unanalyzable, principle in the phenomenal universe.

Upon the whole, then, I conclude that this is the teaching of Monism. If
we view the facts of human volition relatively, or within the four
corners of psychological science, there is no escape from the conclusion
that they are determined with all the rigour which belongs to natural
causation in general. For every sequence of mental changes and every
sequence of cerebral changes, although phenomenally so diverse, are
taken by this theory to be ontologically identical; and therefore the
sequence of mental changes must be determined with the same degree of
'necessity' as is that of the cerebral changes. In short, mental
causation is taken to be but the obverse aspect of physical causation,
and, as previously remarked, it is impossible that the doctrine of
determinism could be taught in a manner more emphatic. But, on the other
hand, the theory of Monism is bound to go further than this. From the
very fact of its having gone so far as to identify all physical
processes with psychical processes, it cannot refuse to take the further
and final step of identifying the most ultimate known principle of the
one with the most ultimate known principle of the other; it is bound to
recognize in natural causation the phenomenal aspect of that which is
known ontologically as volition. But if these two principles are thus
regarded as identical, it clearly becomes as unmeaning to ask whether
the one is the cause of the other, as it would be to ask whether the one
wills the other. For, _ex hypothesi_, the two things being one thing,
or but different modes of viewing the same thing, it becomes mere
nonsense to speak of either determining the other; they are both but
different expressions of the same ultimate fact, namely the fact of
Being as Being.

If this result should be deemed unsatisfactory on account of its
vagueness, let it be remembered that nothing is gained on the side of
clearness by the converse supposition--viz. that priority should be
assigned to the principle of causality. For, if we say it is
inconceivable that anything should come into existence without a
cause--not even excepting the principle of mind itself--then the
question immediately arises--If all volition is caused, what is the
cause of volition? What caused this cause? And so on till we arrive at
the question, What caused the principle of causality? which is absurd.
So that whether we regard mind as prior to cause, or cause as prior to
mind, or neither as prior to the other, we arrive at precisely the same
difficulty. And the difficulty is a hopeless one, because it concerns
the ultimate question of Being as Being, or the final mystery of things.

Or, to state the matter in another way. An explanation means the
reference of observed effects to known causes, or the inclusion of
previously unknown causes among causes better known. Hence it is
obvious, from the very meaning of what we call an explanation, that at
the base of all possible explanations there must lie a great
Inexplicable, which, just because more ultimate than any of our
possible explanations, does not itself require to be explained. To
suppose that it does require to be explained, would be to suppose, that
there is something still more ultimate into which, if known, this
Inexplicable could be merged. Hence, unless we postulate an infinite
series of possible explanations, there must be a basal mystery
somewhere, which, in virtue of its constituting the ground of all
possible explanations, cannot be, and does not require to be, itself
explained. What is this basal mystery? Materialism supposes it to be
lodged in Matter to the exclusion of Mind, while Idealism in its extreme
forms takes the converse view. Theism supposes that it is an intelligent
Person, who is held--and logically enough--not to be able to give any
explanation of his own existence; he is, as it is said, self-existent,
and, if asked to give any account of his being, would only be able to
restate the fact of his being in the words, 'I am that I am.' Lastly,
Pantheism, or Monism, supposes the ultimate mystery to be lodged in the
universe as a whole. Now, in the present connexion the question before
us is simply this--Are we to regard the principle of causality or the
principle of mind as the ultimate mystery? And to this question I answer
that to me it appears most reasonable to assign priority to mind. For,
on the one hand, our only knowledge of causation is empirical, while
even as such it is only possible in the same way as our knowledge of
objective existence in general is possible--namely, by way of inference
from our own mental modifications, which therefore must necessarily have
priority so far as we are ourselves concerned. Next, on the other hand,
even if we were to grant that the principle of causality is the prius,
or the ultimate and inexplicable mystery, I cannot see that it is really
available to explain the fact of personality. To me it appears that,
within the range of human observation, this is the fact that most wears
the appearance of finality, or of that unanalyzable and inexplicable
nature which we are bound to believe must belong to the ultimate mystery
of Being. But, be this as it may, the speculative difficulty of
assigning priority to mind is certainly no greater than that of
assigning it to causality; and this, as above remarked, is a sufficient
answer to the question before us. According to Monism, however, there is
no need to assign priority to either principle, seeing that one is but a
phenomenal expression of the other.

Only one further question remains to be considered. From what I have
just said on the subject of Personality, it will be apparent that the
theory of Monism is in conflict with that of Theism only in so far as
personality appears to imply limitation. This is a point which I have
previously considered in these pages (Chapter iv, p. 109), with the
result of appearing to show that the conflict is one which would
probably vanish could we rise above the necessary limitations of human
thought. Therefore, it here seems worth while to ask, What can be said
by the philosophical theory of Monism to the old theological dilemma
touching free-will and predestination? Or, even apart from any question
of Theism, what position does Monism suppose the psychical activity of
man to hold in relation to that of the universe? Of course the latter
statement of the question is included in the former; and, therefore, we
may present it thus;--If the human will is free, and the theory of
Theism substantially true, how are we to reconcile the fact with the
theory?

According to the theory of Theism as sanctioned by Monism, what we
apprehend as natural causation is the obverse of a part of a _summum
genus_--i.e. the part falling within human observation whose whole is
the Absolute Volition. This Volition, being absolute, can nowhere meet
with restraint; it is therefore absolutely free, and can never
contradict itself. Thus, those circumscribed portions of it which we
know as human minds--and which, on account of being so circumscribed,
are free within themselves--do not in their freedom conflict with the
Absolute Volition. The Absolute Volition and the Relative Volition are
always in unison. It is not that the Absolute Volition unconditionally
determines the Relative Volition--else the Relative Volition would not
be free; but it is that the Absolute Volition invariably assents to the
Relative Volition as to the activity of an integral part of itself. This
will be at once evident if we consider that our only idea of
determination--i.e. causation--is, upon the theistic theory, derived
from our observing the consistency of the Divine Will, whether as
revealed subjectively in the causal operations of our own minds, or
objectively in the causal operations of Nature. Therefore, the idea of
causation as between the Absolute Volition and the Relative Volition is
an idea destitute of meaning. One Relative Volition may act causally on
another. Relative Volition, because each is wholly external to each. But
all Relative Volitions are constituent parts of the Absolute Volition,
which, therefore, cannot act causally _on_ them, though it always acts
substantially _with_ them. Or, otherwise phrased, if the subject is a
constituent part of its own World-eject--the volition of which is always
self-consistent--it follows that the volition of the subject must always
be coincident with that of its World-eject; and this without being
determined in any other sense than the smaller size of a part can be
said to be determined by the larger size of its whole: i.e. the
determination--if we choose so to call it--is not a causal one, but
arises immediately from the inherent nature of the case. The Absolute
Volition within itself is free; the Relative Volition within itself is
free; but there can be no conflict between these two freedoms. For, if
there were a conflict, it must be caused; but where is the cause of this
conflict to come from? Not from the Absolute Volition, which is
everywhere self-consistent; not from the Relative Volition, which is
wholly contained within the Absolute. Thus, regarded from within its own
system, the Relative Volition is free; while, regarded from the system
of its World-eject, the Relative Volition is predestined. But the
freedom is not incompatible with the predestination, nor the
predestination with the freedom. They stand to each other in the
relation of complementary truths, the apparent contradiction of which
arises only from the apparently fundamental antithesis between mind and
cause which it is the privilege of Monism to abolish.

'Whatsoever is first of all things must necessarily
contain it, and actually have, at least, all the perfections that can
ever after exist; nor can it ever give to another any perfection that it
hath not actually in itself, or at least in a higher degree' (Locke). To
this argument Mill answers, 'How vastly nobler and more precious, for
instance, are the vegetables and animals than the soil and manure out of
which, and by the properties of which, they are raised up! But this
stricture is not worthy of Mill. The soil and manure do not constitute
the whole cause of the plants and animals. We must trace these and many
other con-causes (conditions) back and back till we come to 'whatsoever
is first of all things': it is merely childish to choose some few of the
conditions, and arbitrarily to regard them as alone the efficient
causes.
